 this place is amazing.   it's bomb in  n y c and it it bomb in  singapore.   the pancakes and  french toast are just soooo good!  place is open till 6 and sometimes 9pm.   breakfast till 6pm!!!  insane!  that's right there gets 5 stars! place is small.  but they do a great job of placing tables for everyone.   they ended up giving us two tables because we ordered for five people (even though there were only two of us).  blueberry  pancakes -  fire!  my only complaint is they don't put the blueberries inside of the batter.   tastes so much better when inside.  walnut  banana pancakes with a side of  chocolate  chips - so good.   it's like a cookie brioche  french toast - bomb.   great flavor.   nicely cooked.  egg  white omelette with goat cheese.  mushroom.  spinach.   delicious.  n y c to  singapore.   place is a staple. . css-1c2abjj. css-1c2abjj svg useful . css-1qkiuob. css-1qkiuob svg 1 photo. css-z6383k. css-z6383k svg 1 check-in so long as  clinton  street  baking  company continues to dish up the best pancakes  i've ever had in my life be they in  new  york  city.   tokyo.  or  singapore.   i'll continue to give them five stars.  star 1:  how were the service and atmosphere? this  clinton  street is a cute little one comparable to their  tokyo location.  and while it lacked the natural light conducive to food photography ( i know  i know  i'm sorry for even pointing that out).  the service was fast and friendly.   star.   star 2:  how were the portions relative to the cost?$19. 00 for brioche french toast was pricey.  but very much on par with other spots catering to tourists and expats like  clinton  street and  common  man.   star.   stars 3 and 4:  how was the food? clinton  street continues to dish up the best pancakes in the world - seriously.   i don't know how they do it and especially how they maintain consistency internationally.  but these fluffy cakes of goodness are so flavorful and go so well with the blueberries and maple butter syrup that it's just impossible to compete.   two  stars.   star 5:  would you be excited to go back? always.   star.  useful  funny  cool  1 check-in good  american style food.  large portions.  good coffee and tea.  recommended.   pancakes are huge and tasty.  bacon is crunchy and very nice.  2 photos definitely on the pricey side.  but that is to be expected of most of the restaurants in the downtown area.   i went for breakfast and the food was amazing.  with a variety of  american-style options to choose from.   i shared the chocolate chip pancakes and a scrambled eggs dish.  and both were fantastic.   the pancakes were fluffy and the chocolate chips were a perfect complement.   it was such a sweet.  rich dish and  i wish  i had gotten a larger share ( i split between 4 people though.  so that shouldn't have been a surprise).   the eggs were delicious.  and the biscuit that came with it was amazing - so buttery and satisfying.   i would definitely recommend getting a few things to split.  because then you can try multiple offerings.   next time  i am in  singapore  i will definitely come back! delicious breakfast.   good menu options in a nice little neighbourhood.   staff all very friendly and attentive massive portions!!  we've tried the blueberry pancakes and we had to take half away as it was so big.   it was delicious too.   the restaurant was super busy and it was almost 1400.   totally recommend for a late breakfast! 1 photo i'm not a huge fan of pancakes and that's not because  i don't enjoy them.   i do.   i really do.   it's just that not everyone perfects them.   my husband and  i were in  singapore for a couple of days and we both like our meals to be delicious.   so my husband found this place mostly because they have good pancakes (based on the reviews he read) and we decided to give it a try.   we both ordered our pancakes with chocolate chunks.   when the waiter brought the pancakes to our table.  they looked like regular pancakes.   however.  the moment  i drizzled the buttered maple syrup on top of the fluffy round edges of my pancake.   i immediately knew that this one is going to be one of the best  i ever had.   and  i was right.   the buttered maple syrup was so darn good to the point that without it.  the pancake would not taste this incredible.   my husband loved it and so did  i.   glad we gave it a try.   now  i think you should.  3 photos the pancakes are insane!!!!  went here for breakfast and we ordered heuvos ranchis and the salmon omelette.   both were ok but nothing special.   next we ordered the chocolate chip pancakes.   i believe they are one of the best pancakes  i have ever tasted.   they are hot.  fluffy and the chocolate chip are melted inside them.   plus the pancakes are hot such that the chocolate chip sprinkled above them can easily melt.   other than the perfect pancakes the maple syrup that comes with it is also perfect.   it's not your average maple syrup.  useful  cool  3 photos by far the best  western style breakfast/brunch  i've ever had in  singapore.   i highly recommend the blueberry pancakes and the hash brown.  came in a party of 2.   noting the portions of the people around.  we ordered a blueberry pancake.  a hash brown.  and a two eggs.  any style.  which we chose scrambled.   the blueberry pancakes - extremely fluffy.  not at all dry.  with a fragrance that reminds me of nice waffles.  which on its own is already worth a 4/5.   comes with the blueberry sauce which unlike typical jam-type of sauce.  is not too sweet.  but somewhat tart.  very refreshing.   also comes with a small cup of maple butter.   oh the brilliance.   saves you the trouble of spreading the butter.  an extremely cumbersome process.   the maple butter is not too sweet.  with a flavour that is surprisingly not too heavy.  somewhat reminiscent of caramel.  and has a nice amber fragrance to it.   these 3 items eaten together is heavenly.   so overall a 5/5 for this dish.  without a shadow of doubt.   portion to us is too large for 1 person.   maybe closer to 1. 5 persons for typical  singaporean breakfast portioning.   the scrambled eggs.  well done.  nice butter fragrance.  nothing spectacular compared to the other 2 dishes.  4/5.  the has brown.  oh the hash brown.   drenched in buttery goodness.  with a mix of smooth mashed potatoes.  chunky potatoes and some portions that are fried crispy.   plain.  simple goodness made to perfection.   this to me overtakes the well done rosti at  marche as the best rendition of a potato dish.  5/5.   all in all  i am impressed.   i'm not even sure why some people complain about the prices.   it appears expensive.  yes but that reflects the portion they are serving.   bring friends along to share and the prices are extremely reasonable.   coupled with the brilliant quality.  this is a no-brainer.   never had a western style breakfast that truly impressed me in  singapore.   this is the first. . css-vuvvb9. css-vuvvb9 svg updated review 2 check-ins if you want an excellent  american style breakfast.  this is  t h e spot.   cool.  clean.  brightly lit bakery serves a broad breakfast menu all day.   lunch menu served from 11:30am until 9pm.   a good selection of bakery treats are available all day.  previous review if you want an excellent  american style breakfast.  this is  t h e spot.   cool.  clean.  brightly lit bakery serves a broad breakfast menu all day.   lunch menu served from 11:30am until 9pm.   a good selection of bakery treats are available all day.  read more 2 photos 3 check-ins i can't think of a better place to have pies.  waffles or pancakes in  singapore.   the diner style atmosphere is casual and relaxed.   a great place to bring kids and family to during weekends.  1 photo amazing place.   worth the wait.   coffee is great &amp; don't get us started with the pancakes.   renowned for its crisp.  definitely worth a try.  the service was great and the atmosphere was too.   i ordered the blueberry pancakes and the veggie sandwich.  the veggie sandwich was good.  it was packed with avocados which is a plus but it's a little bit pricy.  the pancakes's however.  tasted incredible along with the warm maple butter and the blueberries on top of it.  10/10 would recommend y'all to come here just to get a taste of the pancakes!!. css-1c2abjj. css-1c2abjj svg. css-1qkiuob. css-1qkiuob svg 1 photo best fluffy pancakes in  singapore.    love the sausage patties.    huevos  rancheros is my go-to  dish.    the only item  i'd say doesn't tickle my fancy is the sugared bacon.    i like my bacon unsweetened; will try to order that next visit.  useful  cool  2 photos. css-z6383k. css-z6383k svg 1 check-in finally.  a good  american diner style breakfast place in  singapore!  the food here is pretty good -  i've tried the pancakes with warm maple butter + banana walnut.  as well as chicken and waffles.   both were really good!  the pancakes were extremely fluffy.  and are in my opinion one of the best you can find in here. . . .  and the warm maple butter they're served with was also heavenly!! great breakfast;  i had the huevos rancheros.   pleasantly surprised to find a  mexican classic in  singapore.   our table shared the special pancakes of the month with rum.  coconut.  and bananas which were absolutely divine.  great breakfast food.  busy.  yet nice atmosphere and mediocre service.   went on a  saturday afternoon for a late lunch and they were still very busy.   sat at the counter and ate which gave me a front row seat to the controlled chaos of servers flying around picking up orders and ringing up customers.   the service could have been better - no one spoke to me after  i ordered to check on the food or pour more coffee and  i had to ask for the check.    had the chicken and waffles which was quite good.  especially with their green jalapeño based hot sauce.   add the maple butter and you're good to go.   i agree with another review that the waffle could have been a little more well done.  especially to support the fried chicken but still worth getting.   will definitely be back for those pancakes.  useful  1 check-in loved the thick.  fluffy pancakes and maple butter!  do share the food if you're a small eater.   waitresses were so polite.   loved their service.   we waited for a few minutes to be served as it was quite packed on a  sunday morning.   poached eggs were a tad disappointing as they didn't drain the water.   so the eggs were sitting in a pool of water.   if you're the type who doesn't like sweet-tasting mocha.  then this is the place.   but it was a tad watery to my liking.   overall.  enjoyed the place.   wouldn't mind heading there again to try the other food.  useful  2 photos i missed checking this place out in  new  york so  i was really happy to find that it's now in  singapore!  there wasn't an savory + sweet combo for pancakes so  i ordered a wild blueberry pancake and added bacon.   the pancakes were sooooo fluffy and when paired with the sour-ish berries and sweet syrup.  it was great!  the bacon was too hard for my liking.   be ready to spend a bit.  the pancake with a side of bacon.  coffee and juice came up to $42 1 photo to summarize it all in a word.  pancakes.   e a t the pancakes.  clinton  st  baking  co.  of  manhattan's  lower  east  side finally lands in  singapore with a huge splash.  with glowing reviews in the island's  english language broadsheet.  and features on  t v.  stepping inside.  the dining room successfully recreates that typical  american diner feel.  similar to the original in  n y (but definitely much newer).  the entrees were decently good.  but  i'd recommend the pancakes above everything else.   fluffy on the inside.  crispy on the outside.  paired with a sinful maple-butter sauce that's just amazing as it is calorific.   blueberry.  banana walnut or chocolate chunk.  they're all good.   the house brew is drip coffee.  and refills are free! they had a couple of  southern offerings on the menu.  but  i m o they were  northern interpretations of  southern food.   i liked that the buttermilk fried chicken had cornmeal in the batter.  however the batter lost its crunchiness rather quickly and fell off the chicken before you had a chance to bite it.   conclusion.  stick to the pancakes.  they don't take reservations.  and weekend brunch lines are an hour wait or more.   to avoid the crowds.   i recommend coming in on a weekday.  or late in the afternoon on a weekend.  or heading for the pastry &amp; coffee takeout counter instead.  it's been a while since  i was back in  manhattan.  and  i personally have not been to the original on  clinton  st (there.   i heard the lines are an hour long too).  but comparing this to other brunch type places in  singapore they pretty much come out tops.  3 if this is a place in the  u s.  4 cos it's in  singapore.  useful  cool  2 photos a great spot for a classic  american breakfast.   we had blueberry pancakes.   french toast and the  farmer's breakfast.   all were excellent and the portions are massive.  you certainly won't go hungry!  if you go on the weekend  i would get there when it opens if you don't want to wait.   there were 12 of us waiting by the time it opened.   i'll definitely be back to sample some of their non-breakfast items at some point.   the service was a bit slow.   i think the young staff are a bit overwhelmed.   hopefully that will improve with time.  useful  cool  11 photos 1 check-in i recently had a pancake craving and with all the hype surrounding this place.   i just had to check it out for myself.  popped in here on a weekday.  late afternoon.  and there was no queue.   the place had about 7 people.  so you may want to try your luck instead of the horrendous weekend queues.   there are some benches outside if you should so feel inclined to wait with the crowds.  the  bellini flavors are seasonal here.  and on that day.  it happened to be strawberry.   yum!  prosecco and fruit; can't go wrong!  i got the banana walnut pancakes.  and oh my.  were they delicious.   the pancakes came.  topped with fresh banana.  and crunchy walnuts.  and some sugar sprinkled for extra crunch.   crisp exterior with a fluffy interior with more banana and walnuts within.  coupled with their gorgeous maple syrup-butter sauce. . .   one vessel of sauce is not enough for 3 large pancakes.  so  i got another.   it cost me $2 but oh well.   i didn't come to  clinton  st  baking  co.  to be a stingy person.   a friend told me you can change the flavor of one of the pancakes for an extra $2.  if  i am not wrong.   i also got the cheese grits.  and ye.  it tastes like a savory oatmeal with cheese.   very regular.   service was prompt.  but  i guess a true test of the waitstaff is peak hours.  which  i obviously did not get to see.  would return for the pancakes.   or maybe to try the chicken and waffles.  p.  s.   amex not accepted here.  see all photos from  natalie  h.  for  clinton  street  baking  company &amp;  restaurant useful  funny  cool  2 photos what makes this brunch spot unique is their homemade maple syrup which tastes different than anything  i've ever tasted (in singapore and in the  u.  s. ).   the maple syrup is light and sweet with a tang of caramel(?) and an excellent addition to the crispy pancakes or waffles.   i will admit it's not the most balanced or nutritious meal however.  and do feel a bit guilty and gluttonous after having had brunch there once.   the wait can be long but i would still say it was worth it.   would go back once in a while cool  get your carbs on! brunch lovers and carb lovers - this is  y o u r spot!   yes.  the wait can be a little crazy.  but if you're patient.  you will be rewarded with some fab.  soul-hugging.  muffin-top making food (just spend an extra 10 minutes on the elliptical!)   the trick is to go early (before 10 am) and the wait is manageable.    they are only open until 6 pm now but that may change soon.  the food we couldn't help but indulge in a few pastries.    the bacon.  spinach.  cheddar muffin was savory.  a little sweet.  and indulgent.    even my baby loved it (well for obvious reasons).   the cheddar scone was crumbly and had a wonderful buttery top.    but the real star is the crab cake eggs benedict.    it was the best eggs benedict  i've ever eaten!   each component from the just cooked spinach to the creamy hollandaise sauce to the rich crab cake was just plain delicious.    i also had the chorizo with eggs and it was savory and satisfying.    we were very happy with the food so far and this is one of my new.  favorite brunch spots! useful  cool  highly recommend for a great brunch.   best breakfast biscuit sandwich  i've ever had.   pancakes are typical  i felt.  i lived in  n y c for 5 years and remember my times at  clinton  street  baking  company out there very fondly.   i loved everything there.  even their pancakes had a very impactful memory that  i became jaded to any other pancake.   coming here however.   i feel that the pancakes are nowhere near the quality in  n y c and even taste pretty typical to any other cafe which is the the only reason for the minus 1 star given how hyped they are.  the biscuit breakfast sandwich is the best  i've ever had in my life.   i was totally wow'd by this here in  singapore and if my review was based on only this.   i would have easily given this a resounding 5+ star.  orange juice is fresh as is their coffee.   i would recommend that you call ahead and get a reservation.   if you show up during the breakfast or lunch (or weekend brunch) hours.  you will for sure need to wait the usual 2-3 hours that they mention.  highly recommend but don't come in just for the pancakes! useful  funny  cool  1 photo being a fan of the pancakes and southern breakfast of the original  clinton  st baking company in  n y c.  we excitedly arranged to meet at this place for brunch to reminisce our old  n y c days.   recommendation- just stick to the fried chicken and pancakes.   they were tasty and definitely of similar standards to the dishes we had in  n y c. .  however.  what really disappointed us was their 'cheesy grits'.   it looked and tasted like oatmeal porridge; and when we tried to tell them that was not definitely not grit.  they checked and confirmed it was 'grit' made from 'barley' and they followed the original recipe.   com'on. .  if it's not grit.  don't insist it is and bullshit us like we are some ignorant customers.   i would have accepted a yes sorry it's not easy to find grits and this is what we have used to replace it. .  google grit and it is ' grits is a food made from corn that is ground into a coarse meal and then boiled. '  suggestion to the chef - even polenta has a more similar taste and texture to real grits than whatever you are serving now.   next is the corn bread which has a ginseng taste to it.   it happens that my friend liked ginseng and hence liked it. .  otherwise  i would not recommend you order that either.   spinach was cooked like  chinese style and a bit bland.   all in all nice environment but not sure  i'll be back for the food.  1 check-in i had heard about this place from a few people.    i tasked myself for bringing a pumpkin pie for a  thanksgiving get together.  i wanted a back up.    i called the week before and they mentioned that the seasonal pies (pumpkin and pecan were $55)   nope.    i ended up baking one.  but still wanted another desert so  i decided to pop by on  sunday because  i wanted breakfast and needed a back up dessert.    i ordered the breakfast sandwich that came with spinach.  bacon.  egg and cheese on a biscuit.    now.  this place is supposedly by the same company as the one in  n y.  so my expectations were high.    i'm from the  south.  so you better bring your  a game when it comes to biscuits.    i ordered and my food came out before my latte.    it looked awful and for $18.   i was not happy.    the cheese looked like it was under a heat lamp for the last hour.  the hashbrowns were burnt.  and the one side of the biscuit had what looked like a tomato sauce on it.    w t f?   the bacon was so sad and undercooked  i just couldn't touch it.    i ate a tiny piece of the biscuit.  and drank my latte.    the waitress was nice enough to ask me what was wrong in which  i told her it looked like my meal came from when  bush was  president.  and asked if  i wanted a replacement.    the pancakes looked really good but by this time  i needed to get outta there.    i did order a  strawberry  rubarb pie to take with.  and they took off my breakfast off my bill.    they also game me a large take away biscuit for good measure which by itself was really tasty.    everyone at  thanksgiving liked the pie.   i didn't taste it.    i doubt  i'd come back here there are just too many good options for brunch in  singapore to strike out again.  useful  funny  cool  4 photos located in the middle of  purvis  street.  is this cafe called  clinton  street  baking  company.   its main outlet is in  new  york.   united  states.   it is well known for its pancake and is known as " new  york's # 1 breakfast spot" by  lonely  planet.  as well as.  " best  pancakes" by  new  york  magazine (twice).   the place was decorated in a traditional.  clean cut look.  the usual menu was presented in a booklet.  besides the usual menu.  there is daily special items on the board. as well as.  dinner special items.  boozy  salted  caramel ($15++ left)vanilla ice cream.  bourbon.  salted caramel sauce without alcohol ($10++ right) pretty strong in the alcohol.   the drink tasted very rich and creamy.  but could not taste the salted caramel in it.  crab  cakes ($15++) two crab cakes.  served with classic remoulade.  and house slaw.  the crab cake was moist and creamy inside with chunks of crab meat in it.  chicken &amp;  waffles ($21++)with honey- tabasco sauce.  a crispy  belgian vanilla buttermilk waffle.  and signature warm maple butter.  the chicken was served char burnt.  which made one quite disappointed.   some parts of the batter was just too hard and bitter to be eaten.   one had to remove the batter coating in order to eat.   although the staff saw that we had left much of the batter untouch when clearing the plates.  no one asked us about the food.   the waffle was not the usual crispy and fluffy type.   instead it was eggy and soft.   more like kueh kueh type.   not bad with the maple butter sauce.   but not really my type.  pancakes with  warm  maple  butter ($18++) served with wild blueberries.  the first which  i notice when the dish was served.  was that the pancakes were super thick in size.   the pancake was fluffy and soft.  with a kind of eggy taste.   some may felt that the blueberries was a bit too sour.   nice but could not take in more a piece of pancake.   it was way too much for me.  overall felt that the food was overrated.   maybe  i was expecting too much but it just did not blow me off.   although the place looked sparkling clean.   i was surprised to see a certain small animal running through the dining area.   no wonder the place had placed a notice that it would be closed early for maintenance on the coming  monday.   i soon lost my appetite after that and trying to vomit everything out.  see all photos from  doreen  t.  for  clinton  street  baking  company &amp;  restaurant useful  funny  cool . css-1qkiuob. css-1qkiuob svg 1 photo. css-z6383k. css-z6383k svg 1 check-in my first time here.   ever.   didn't know about the  new  york branch so there is no basis for comparison.   i've heard lots of excited rumblings of course.  and friends who used to live in  new  york were thrilled about its opening.   fair enough.   from all accounts.   i hear that this place largely works.   the food is comparable and all.   i'll have to take their word for it.   i only came here for some cake and  i got the upside down pineapple cake.   i don't know why but seeing a badly sliced and sloppily presented cake annoyed me.   it shows a lack of care in the attentive-level of staff.  when  i went to pay.   i noticed that other cakes (of other flavors) were similarly badly sliced.   woah.   i really did think  clinton  st  bakery was better than this.   taste-wise.  the cake was fine.   not great.  not terrible.   the staff was sufficiently polite.   but  i think the devil's in the details and they need to teach their staff how to slice cakes properly.  lift the slices and place them on plates. . css-1c2abjj. css-1c2abjj svg useful  funny  cool  i came here because the hotel breakfast at the  intercontinental was $ s30 a pop.  and  i thought  i could do better -- or at least the same for less.   so  i decided to go to  killiney  kopitiam but my  ang  moh instincts took over while passing the lower-rated  clinton  street  baking  co.   they had muffins on display and  i am partial to  western breakfasts.   so  i was sucked in.   the first thing  i saw from the menu was it was not going to be much less expensive.   so maybe it'll be great?  same for more? i ordered what  i thought was their signature omelette because it had their name on it.   but it only comes with two add-in ingredients (besides the eggs.  of course).   and apparently nothing but those two plus the eggs because when the omelette arrived  i was asked if  i wanted salt.  pepper.  or catsup.   the first sign of cooking mediocrity is the need to season it with any of those things after cooking.  especially a $20 omelette.   if  i'd known  i would have chosen bacon to go in there.   ugh.   it was so bland.   and dry.   i regretted not asking for catsup.   i regretted more not having salsa.  which is the best cure for bland eggs.  the hash browns.  though.  were remarkable.   if it was a two-egg omelette instead of a three-egger  i was pushing through  i would have savored them more.   my cappuccino was also well done.   final tally.  $ s33! at the hotel  i could have bottomless juice.  cappuccinos.  an array of  japanese.   chinese.   indian.  and  western breakfast items.   smoked salmon with capers.   fresh-made waffles.   croissants and danishes.   fresh fruit.   i got less for more.   i'm kind of amazed they didn't have oatmeal (or porridge) on the menu.   my punishment for not going to the kopitiam. 