Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

Basic characteristics and evaluation of shale oil
reservoirs
Zaixing Jiang1*, Wenzhao Zhang1, Chao Liang1, Yongshi Wang2, Huimin Liu2 and Xiang Chen3
School of Energy Resources, China University of Geosciences, Beijing 100083, China
Research Institute of Geological Sciences, Sinopec Shengli Oilfield Company, Dongying 257015, China
3
Sinopec Henan Oilfield Company, Nanyang 473132, China
Received June 3, 2016; Accepted October 21, 2016
1

2

Abstract: Shale oil refers to liquid hydrocarbons existing in free, dissolved or adsorbed states in the
effective source rock of mudstones or shales, where some residual oil is retained after hydrocarbon
generation and expulsion from the mudstones or shales. Basically shale oil experiences no migration
or only undergoes some primary, short-distance migration within the source rocks. So far, there is no
consensus on the exact definition of shale oil in China. Researches on the reservoir-controlling factors
and evaluation elements are also far from sufficient. In this study, shale oil reservoirs are defined as
mudstones or shales excluding the interbedded or adjacent layers of coarser siliciclastic or chemicalbiogenic lithofacies (e.g. siltstone, carbonate, salt or chert layers) in the source rocks. According to
different reservoiring mechanisms, shale oil reservoirs are classified into “fracture type” and “matrix
type”. The general features of shale oil reservoirs include: rich in organic matters, dominated by Type
I and II1 kerogen (with Ro = 0.6%-1.2% and total organic content (TOC) > 2.0%), complex mineral
compositions and laminated structures, tight storage space, low porosity and ultra-low permeability,
and as well as the requirement for reservoir fracturing. This paper emphasizes the critical role of
organic matter in the formation and evaluation of shale oil reservoirs, and its critical control on the
oil generation potential and storage capacity of shale, which eventually determine the oil content and
productivity of shale oil reservoirs. Besides, a set of reservoir evaluation criteria is also put forward
with a focus on the TOC content, in which the threshold values of TOC are set to be 2% and 4%,
and a variety of indicators are taken into account including the type and maturity of organic matter,
the thickness of organic-rich shale, mineral compositions and rock types, porosity and permeability,
and fracturing ability. The evaluation criteria divide shale oil reservoirs into three grades, i.e., target
reservoir, favorable reservoir and invalid reservoir.

Key words: shale oil; tight oil; reservoir characteristics; evaluation elements
and criteria; organic matter content

1 Introduction
With continuous worldwide decline in conventional oil and gas
production and increasing demand of energy resources, the
unconventional oil and gas has now become a viable supplement for the conventional energy sources with a series of breakthroughs. The recent rapid development of shale gas also attracts
a widespread attention on oil resources in shale formation. As
the definition of shale oil changes in recent years, along with the

further improvement of enrichment theory and the progress of
exploration and development technology, shale oil has become
the frontier of petroleum exploration and a hot research area for
new oil reserve.
At present, only the United States and Canada are the major
countries to realize the commercial development of shale oil and
gas in the world. Since 2005, the shale oil production in the U.S.
has increased rapidly. Despite the low oil price, shale oil produc-

* Corresponding author. Email: jiangzx@cugb.edu.cn

© 2017 Chinese Petroleum Society. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

149

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

tion of U.S. reaches 4.9×106 barrels per day (b/d) in 2015 (EIA,
2016), which equivalent to 98% of domestic daily oil production
(Wang et al., 2016). According to the statistics of U.S. EIA, the
shale oil production will increase up to 7.1×106 b/d in 2040. The
shale oil exploration and development in the U.S. is focused on
marine shale formations including the Bakken, Eagle Ford and
Barnett, among which the Bakken formations in the Williston
Basin have been well documented. The Bakken shale consists of
three parts: shale beds in the upper part and the lower part are
high-quality source rocks with a strong capability of generating
hydrocarbons; the middle part mainly comprises dolomitic siltstone and calcareous sandstone (Miller et al., 2008; Sonnenberg
and Pramudito, 2009). This kind of reservoiring pattern typically known as “sandwich cake” is actually the case that tight
siltstones are interbedded with oil in the shale formation.
Commercial oil flows to some different degrees have been obtained in the mudstone-shale horizons of the Mesozoic and Cenozoic continental basins such as the Songliao Basin, Bohai Bay Basin and Nanxiang Basin, of which the reservoiring space mainly
consists of shale matrix pores and fractures, typical of “shale
oil” by definition. In the Western sag of the Liaohe Depression,
the self-flowing industrial oil flows were found in the fractured
mudstone-shale of Member 3 of the Shahejie Formation in Well
Shugu 165, with the maximum oil output of 24 m3/d. In the Bonan
sag of the Jiyang Depression, the commercial oil and gas flows
have been discovered in the shale of Member 1 and lower part of
Member 3 of the Shahejie Formation in 11 exploratory wells at
the end of 2011, and the low-yield oil and gas flows were found
in the lower part of Member 3 and the upper part of Member 4 of
the Shahejie Formation in 8 exploratory wells (Zhang et al., 2012).
In the Biyang sag of the Nanxiang Basin, the commercial oil flow
of 4.68 m3/d was obtained in the mudstone-shale of the upper part
of Member 3 of the Hetaoyuan Formation after the fracturing
in Well Biye HF-1 (Chen et al., 2011). In the Permian Lucaogou
Formation of Malang and Taihu sags in the Santanghu Basin, the
oil was discovered in 15 exploratory wells, and the commercial
oil flow was found in 4 wells (Liang et al., 2012). The recoverable
shale oil resources in major basins in China are preliminary estimated to be about 21.2×109t (Wang et al., 2016).
In China, the current exploration and development of shale oil
enters into an exploring phase overall. Some advancements
have been achieved both theoretically and practically not only
by referring to the North American models and experience in
exploration and development, but also through exploratory researches centered on the diversities of China’s basic geological
conditions, significant theoretical and practical progress has
been made, but there are still many issues to be addressed.
(1) At present, there is no consensus on the definition and connotation of shale oil. The terminologies of shale oil and tight
oil are used quite confusingly (Chen et al., 2011). It is not clear

150

whether shale oil includes oil resources in other types of reservoirs migrating to neighboring source rocks. There is no clarified classification of shale oil reservoirs for different reserving
mechanisms, leading to the controversy on which one should be
given the priority: the controlling factors or the evaluation elements of shale oil reservoirs.
(2) Further researches need to be conducted to figure out the reservoiring mechanisms of shale oil, such as the type, effectiveness
and distribution of reservoiring space in shales as well as the occurrence state, retention mechanisms, seepage mechanisms and
conditions of exploration and production. So far, the oil and gas
in mudstone-shale fractures has been found in many countries
and regions. Therefore mudstone-shale fractures are commonly
deemed to producing oil. However, the research is still far from
sufficient on the occurrence state, seepage mechanisms and movability of shale oil in matrix pore types. It is still quite controversial on whether commercial accumulation and economic exploitation can be achieved in these plays. There is no theoretical system
concerning the reservoiring mechanisms of shale oil.
(3) Current researches are mostly based on shale gas reservoir
evaluation, systematic and effective evaluation methods for shale
oil reservoirs have not been established. Zou et al. proposed that
the key factors for shale oil evaluation include the abundance
and maturity of organic matter, the index of reservoir fracturability, shale oil viscosity, formation energy and the magnitude
of organic-rich shale (Zou et al., 2013). Zhang et al. recommended that factors including oil type, abundance and maturity of
organic matter, buried depth, formation pressure should also be
taken into account for shale oil evaluation (Zhang et al., 2012).
Currently, the key evaluation elements have not been determined
for shale oil reservoir classification, resource evaluation and
strategic area selection. Besides, the systematic and effective
evaluation criteria have not been established.

2 Definition and connotation of shale oil
Different scholars and institutions have different opinions on the
definition of shale oil. Besides, there is confusion and controversy
in usage of terminologies such as shale oil and tight oil.

2.1 Tight oil
Tight oil is characterized by tight reservoir and poor permeability,
which is consequently unable to be developed economically
through using conventional techniques. Unconventional techniques,
such as horizontal drilling and multistage hydraulic fracturing
technology, are required for the economic production. The
concept of tight oil can be understood both in a broad sense and a
narrow sense (Zhou et al., 2012). Generalized tight oil refers to the
petroleum accumulation contained in the low-porosity and lowpermeability reservoirs, including the oil resources in source rocks
and those expelled from source rocks and migrated to the inter-

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

beds or adjacent formations. However, tight oil in a narrow sense
refers to the oil resources in tight reservoirs excluding the source
rocks (shale), which is not widely used for practical application.
Different scholars have different understandings on the concept
of “tight oil”. Mills put forward a vague concept of tight oil
which makes a simple distinction between tight oil and shale
oil based on the physical properties of crude oil (API gravity
and crude oil viscosity), the concept holds that tight oil refers to
the light crude oil in hydrocarbon-bearing formations with low
porosity and permeability (Mills, 2008). It was pointed out by
Lin et al. that tight oil is “self-generated, self-reservoired and
continuously distributed petroleum accumulations, which exist
in organic-rich low-permeability shale, argillaceous siltstone
and sandstone inter-bed system”, in this definition, shale is
considered to be the main reservoir (Lin et al., 2011). Based on
generation and reservoiring model, reservoir characteristics,
physical properties of crude oil and production capacity of
individual wells, Zou et al. proposed that tight oil refers to
the oil accumulated after a short distance of migration in
tight reservoirs which is in symbiosis with source rocks, the
in situ reservoir matrix permeability is less than 0.1 mD and
the porosity is less than 10%, providing a narrow, restricted
definition (Zou et al., 2012). However, it was pointed out by Jia
et al. that tight oil occurs in source rocks or refers to petroleum
accumulation in reservoiring rocks inter-bedded with source
rocks adjacent to tight sandstones and tight carbonates (Jia et al.,
2012), providing a generalized definition for tight oil. At present,
the term “tight oil” used by most organizations and media refers
to the generalized definition of tight oil.

2.2 Shale oil
The use of shale oil terminology can date back to hundreds of
years ago, but the early shale oil referred to the oil produced
from oil shale processing, i.e., synthetic oil. Oil shale is a kind of
combustible solid mineral resources with high content of ash and
organic matter, from which a kind of unconventional oil resources
similar to natural oil can be refined through low temperature
carbonization. The shale oil refining process related to oil shale
has a history of one hundred years. The term “shale oil” has been
commonly recognized and used with a clear connotation.
The “shale oil” at the present exploration and development
refers to the liquid hydrocarbons existing as free or adsorption
state in mudstone or shale formations that have reached the oil
generation threshold and can be directly exploited using such
techniques as horizontal drilling, hydraulic fracturing, and
etc. The word “shale oil” can be understood in both broad and
narrow senses. Shale oil generally refers to the oil resources
contained in tight oil-bearing layers (including interlayers of
other rocks excluding mudstone and shale), while in a narrow
sense shale oil refers to the oil resources in mudstone and shale
which are source rocks.

It was pointed out by Zou et al. that shale oil refers to the oil
stored in shale formations which are rich in organic matters and
filled in nanoscale apertures (Zou et al., 2013). This definition
clearly distinguishes tight oil and gas from shale oil and gas. It is
considered that tight oil and gas is preserved in tight sandstone
or carbonate reservoirs after a short-distance migration, while
shale oil and gas is mainly accumulated in the organic-rich shale
formations basically without undergoing migration. However,
it was pointed out by Zhang et al. that the main medium
layer where shale oil accumulates include the mudstone-shale
formations which have generated or are generating oil, as
well as the mudstone-shale strata with certain tight sandstone,
carbonate or volcanic rock inter-layers (Zhang et al., 2012).
Shale oil commonly mentioned in current papers or statistics is
the general meaning.
Tight oil is short for tight reservoir oil, which generally refers to
the oil in the reservoirs with low porosity and poor permeability
(the porosity is commonly less than 10%, and the in situ matrix
permeability is less than 0.1 mD). The reservoir rock types
include shale, siltstone, sandstone, limestone, dolomite and
even volcanic rocks. Shale oil specifically refers to the liquid
hydrocarbons in mudstone and shale which are effective source
rocks. Shale oil reservoir specifically refers to the oil-bearing
and oil-producing horizons, which mainly are mudstone and
shale. At present, the debate on the connotation of shale oil
mainly lies in whether it should include oils in other types
of tight inter-layers or adjacent layers (siltstone, sandstone,
limestone and dolomite) of source rocks. The oil resources
in such inter-layers or adjacent layers are different from that
accumulated in pure mudstone and shale in terms of the sourcereservoir relationship, seepage mechanisms, as well as main
factors controlling the accumulation and development conditions.
It is a kind of tight oil, but should not be classified as shale oil
(Fig. 1). Shale oil is a type of tight oil that is accumulated in the
source rock formations. It basically experiences no migration
or only short-distance primary migration within the source
rocks. It is retented and accumulated under overpressure and
via diffusion. For the oil in the inter-layer of shale formations
or adjacent to other types of rock formations, the source and
reservoir are in direct contact or close to each other, the oil
source usually undergoes primary migration or short-distance
secondary migration, the accumulation dynamics comes from
overpressure and buoyancy effect. The reservoir is characterized
by high permeability, large reserving space, good reservoir
connectivity, and great brittleness, which makes it easier to be
stimulated.

2.3 Classification of shale oil reservoirs
Reservoiring storage space and pore inter-connectivity of
hydrocarbon-bearing mudstone and shale are the key elements
to form shale oil reservoirs. The currently accepted reservoiring

151

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

mechanisms include: (1) fracture network formed by tectonic
movements or natural hydraulic fracturing can serve as oil
reservoirs, (2) various types of micro-pore and micro-fracture
in the matrix of mudstone and shale also make good reservoirs.
Based on different reservoiring mechanisms, shale oil reservoirs
can be divided into two types as outlined below.
Tight oil

Shale oil

Oil in tight interlayer of shale

Oil in tight formations
adjacent to source rocks

shale, inter-granular and intra-granular pores in clay and matrix
particles, inter-granular pores in pyrite, unstable dissolution
pores of minerals, inter-crystalline pores in recrystallized
carbonate mineral, especially pores in organic matter from
hydrocarbon conversion. The oil-bearing potential of shale
reservoirs is closely related to a number of factors including the
abundance and maturity of organic matter. Using conventional
development techniques, this kind of shale oil is difficult to
be effectively produced. However, when the shale distribution
scale, oil content and rock fracturability of reservoirs reach a
certain condition, horizontal drilling, multistage fracturing and
other measures can be used to obtain industrial oil flows. The
exploration and development practice of shale oil in the Biyang
sag has proven to be a great breakthrough in such a matrix-type
shale oil (Chen et al., 2011).

3 Characteristics and accumulation
mechanism of shale oil reservoirs

Tight
limestone

Fig. 1

Tight
dolostone

Tight
sandstone

Mud
shale

Graphic illustration of tight oil and shale oil

The first type is the mudstone and shale reservoir with massive
well-developed natural fractures, i.e., the fracture type. Most of
the shale oil exists as a free state in the fractures of mudstone
and shale beds, and the fractures can also greatly improve
permeability. The enrichment of the fracture-type shale oil is
controlled by fracture and the development of fracture system
often closely related to factors such as formation pore pressure,
anisotropic horizontal stress, faulting and folding. The sweet
spots or zones are often associated with the abnormally highpressure zone within the thick block shale, adjacent to faults
and around the turning region of regional structures. This kind
of shale oil is recoverable but usually not stable in production.
The initial output of oil wells is quite high but declines rapidly,
and there is also a great variabilities in the production capacity
among wells. A typical example is the Monterey Shale in the U.S.
San Joaquin Basin (Zhang et al., 2012).
The second type refers to the mudstone and shale reservoir
with no fracture development and matrix pore as the main
reservoiring storage space, i.e., matrix type. Most of the shale
oil exists as free and adsorbed states in various kinds of pores,
such as the matrix pores and micro fractures of mudstone and

152

Compared with conventional oil reservoirs, the oil content
of shale oil reservoir is not only related to the lithologies and
physical property parameters, but also closely related to the
geochemical parameters. Shale oil reservoirs have a higher
demand for the distribution and hydrocarbon generation ability
of source rocks. Economic development of shale oil can only be
achieved in large-scale, stably distributed shale beds with high
content of organic matter. Organic matter plays a critical role in
controlling the formation of shale oil reservoirs.

3.1 Characteristics of organic matter controlling
on shale oil reservoirs
Continental shale oil region in China is mainly developed in
the semi-deep lake and deep lake sedimentary environments.
The organic matters are mainly of Type-I and Type-II1 kerogen
with moderate maturity and Ro values of 0.5%-1.1%. The shale
has a moderate or high abundance of organic matter. The total
organic carbon (TOC) is generally above 2.0%. In contrast,
the major marine shale oil reservoirs in the U.S. are dominated
by Type-II kerogen with relatively high abundance of TOC of
generally greater than 3%, and relatively high maturity with Ro
values of 0.6%-1.5% (Table 1) (Miller et al., 2008; Sonnenberg
and Pramudito, 2009; Chen et al., 2011; EIA, 2012; IEA, 2012;
Liang et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2012).
3.1.1 Oil generation potential and oil content of shale
determined by organic matter content
Organic matter provides a material basis for generating shale
oil. Studies have shown that in the case of low TOCo (original
organic carbon), the oil generated by source rocks is mainly
used to meet their own needs in the absorption by organic
matters and minerals. When TOCo increases to a certain value,
the massive free oil starts to fill the matrix pores of mudstone

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

Table 1 Comparison of organic geochemical parameters between continental
shale oil in China and marine shale oil in the U.S.
Development
horizon

Region

Es3 x

Bonan sag

Lithology
Shale, limestone,
calcareous shale

Es4 s

Western sag

Es3

Carbonaceous mud shale

Biyang sag

Eh3 s

Calcareous shale,
silty shale

Malang sag

P2 l

Williston Basin

Bakken (C1)

Fort Worth Basin

Barnett (C1)

Southern Texas

Eagle Ford (K2)

Calcareous mudstone,
dolomite mudstone
Limestone, shale,
dolomite siltstone
Siliceous shale,
calcareous shale,
limestone
Shale, limestone

Kerogen type

R o/ %

TOC/ %

Type I-II1

0.52-0.92

Concentrated in the range of 2-5, with
the maximum of9.3

Type I-II1

0.54-1.44

Dominated by
Type II1

/

Type I-II1

0.52-0.87

Dominated by
Type I

0.5-0.9

Totally within the range of 1.4-11.9,
and concentrated in the range of 3-6

Type II

0.65-0.9

Concentrated in the range of 7.2-13

Type II

0.6-1.4

Concentrated in the range of 4-8

Type I, Type II

1.15-1.4

Concentrated in the range of 2-7

Concentrated in the range of 1-2, with
the maximum of4.2
Averaged at 2.61, with the maximum
of 16.33

Averaged at 2.89, with the maximum
of 4.96

Es3 x denotes the lower part of Member 3 of Paleogene Shahejie Formation; Es4 s denotes the upper part of Member 4 of Paleogene Shahejie Formation; Eh3s denotes the upper part
Member 3 of Paleogene Hetaoyuan Formation; P2l denotes Permian Lucaogou Formation; Bakken (C1) denotes the Lower Carboniferous Bakken Formation; Barnett (C1) denotes
the Lower Carboniferous Barnett Formation; Eagle Ford (K2) denotes the Upper Cretaceous Eagle Ford Formation.

potential, which can result in more residual hydrocarbon. In
conclusion, higher TOC leads to higher oil content in shale.

and shale, then undergoes migration and expulsion, which can
thus be exploited. The content of chloroform bitumen “A” and
free hydrocarbon amount “S1” from Rock Eval pyrolysis can
directly reflect the oil content of shale. Statistical analysis was
carried out on the geochemical indicators of source rocks in five
regions including the Songliao, Hailar and Bohai Bay basins,
in general, the “S1” and chloroform bitumen “A” increase with
TOC abundance (Lu et al., 2012). The organic geochemical data
of shale oil reservoirs in the Biyang sag also proved that the
content of chloroform bitumen “A” and “S1” have a good positive
correlation with TOC (Fig. 2). The content of organic matter
determines the amount of shale oil. Under the condition of
similar organic matter type and maturity, the higher content of
organic carbon in shale means greater hydrocarbon generation

3.1.2 Organic matter content VS shale reservoiring capacity
Organic matter in shale has higher porosity and permeability
than the associated rock matrix and can provide pores and
channels for the reservior and flow of hydrocarbons. With the
thermal evolution of kerogen and the expulsion of generated
oil and gas, organic pores will be developed. In addition, pores
may also be formed between matrix and organic matter due to
the volume shrinkage of the organic matter. The organic acid
from hydrocarbon generation, on the other hand, will increase
the solubility of minerals by providing H+ and complexing metal
elements. As a consequence, unstable minerals are dissolved to
4.0
Free hydrocarbon “S 1 ”/mg·g -1

Chloroform bitumen “A”/%

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0 0

2

Fig. 2

4
TOC/%

6

8

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0 0

2

4
TOC/%

6

8

Relationship between oil content and TOC of muddy shale in the 3rd
Member of the Hetaoyuan Formation in the Biyang sag

153

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

form pores. Organic matter-related pores are well-connected
and have high abundance, related studies carried out by Jarvie
et al. indicated that shale with 7% organic matter can increase
porosity by 4.9% through consuming 35% of organic carbon
during the hydrocarbon conversion process (Jarvie et al., 2007).
According to the statistical data of the lower part of Member 3
of the Shahejie Formation, Well Luo-69 in the Luojia area of
the Zhanhua sag, a rough positive correlation can be observed
between TOC and porosity, the fracture density also increases
with increasing TOC (Fig. 3). In conclusion, in the case of

similar mineral compositions, the higher organic matter content
in shale corresponds the more pores and fractures, which lead to
better reservoiring capacity.
3.1.3 The carbonate crystal morphology influenced by
organic matter content
Through the obser vation of sliced mudstone and shale
samples selected from the Biyang, Zhanhua, Dongying and
other sags, the calcite in the shale reservoirs mainly has
three forms, i.e., micrite, granular spar and acicular spar.

16
Average fracture density/per meter

30

Porosity/%

12

8

4

0

0

2

4

TOC/%

6

8

10

20

10

0

0

1

2

3
TOC/%

4

5

>5

Fig. 3 Relationship among porosity, fracture development and TOC of muddy shale in the
lower part of Member 3 of the Shahejie Formation, Well Luo-69 in the Zhanhua sag

The three forms have some relationships with TOC: when
TOC is less than 2%, the calcite will appear in the form of
micrite with no recrystallization; when TOC is more than 2%,
recrystallization starts, and the calcite mainly exists in the
form of microspar and granular spar; when the TOC is more
than 4%, further recrystallization will occur, and the calcite
is mainly in the form of acicular spar. As TOC increasing, the
degree of crystallization will become stronger (Fig. 4). This
phenomenon is thought to be related to the thermal evolution
and the TOC content (Wang et al., 2005). During the process
of thermal evolution and hydrocarbon conversion, organic
matter would release organic acids, which forms acid solution
in the pores and dissolves the micritic calcite in the calcareous
shale. Due to a reduction in organic acid expulsion, the calcite

100µm

(a)

(b)

recrystallizes after reprecipitation. However, when the organic
matter has a fairly high degree of thermal evolution within a
certain range and depth, it is the content of organic carbon that
determines the recrystallization form of carbonate morphology,
which determines whether it remains in the form of micrite,
preliminarily recrystallized to be crystalline powder and
granule, or further recrystallized to be acicular spar.
The recrystallization caused by hydrocarbon generation
is favorable for shale reservoirs. On one hand, it provides
reservoiring space including recrystallization intergranular
pores, dissolution pores and interlayer seams, thus improving
the porosity. On the other hand, the mechanical properties of
rock are changed. After the clay mixture is excluded during the

200µm

(c)

200µm

(a) Micrite calcite, TOC = 1.74%, Well Biye HF-1 at 2425.4 m; (b) Granular calcite, TOC = 3.67%, Well Biye HF-1 at 2435.6 m; (c) acicular calcite, TOC =
4.05%, Well Biye HF-1 at 2440.7 m.

Fig. 4

154

Crystalization morphology of carbonate mineral in Member 3 of Hetaoyuan Formation, Biyang sag

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

reservoirs, TOC peaks are within the range of 3%-6%; for highabundance shale oil reservoirs, TOC peaks are within the range
of 4%-10% (Liang et al., 2012). It is thus clear that the content
of organic matter can control the quality of shale oil reservoir,
and therefore becomes an important factor which affects the
productivity of shale oil reservoirs.

recrystallization, there will be an increase in the mineral content
and brittleness of calcite.
As shown in the histogram of the samples from the Zhanhua
sag, Well Luo-69 (Fig. 5), the depth of 3060 m is an obvious
turning point of TOC, below which the TOC is generally less
than 2% and above which the TOC is basically greater than 2%,
partially goes beyond 4% and even higher. Correspondingly,
the parameters are also significantly improved in the upper
part, including the hydrocarbon generation potential “S1+S2”,
chloroform bitumen“A”, porosity, and oil saturation. The oiltesting well data shows the horizons at the depth of 3040-3066
m (TOC > 2%) is an oil reservoir. Based on the TOC data of
the shale oil members with different productivity in shale oil
reservoirs of the Lucaogou Formation in the Malang sag, Liang
et al. point out that TOC peaks are within the range of 1%4% in the water producing wells; for low-abundance shale oil
Strata

0

R4
GR/API Depth
300
100 /m Lithologic 0
profile
R2. 5
SP/mV

-20

60

0

3000

Th/U

3.2 Mineral compositions of shale
Shale refers to the fine-grained sedimentary rocks consisting
of fine grained sediments with grain sizes less than 0.062
mm. Meanwhile, shale is rich in organic matter with fissile
or laminated beddings. Mineral compositions of shale are
complex, composed mainly of brittle minerals such as quartz,
feldspar, calcite and other clay minerals like montmorillonite,
illite/smectite, illite, kaolinite, as well as minor amount of
pyrite. These mineral components can form four kinds of basic

Sr / Ba

10 0

Calcite Clay
/%
/%

10 0

100 0

(S 1 + S 2 )
/(mg·g -1 )

1000

80 0

Cb “A”
/%

TOC
/%
10 0

Oil
Porosity Hp/mD
saturation
/%
/%

2.5 0

20 0

300 0

100

2920

2940

Lower part of Member 3 of Shahejie Formation

Paleogene

Shahejie Formation

Cenozoic

2960

2980

3000

3020

3040

3060

3080

3100

3120

3140
Laminated calcareous
clay rocks with high
organic matter content

Massive calcareous
Laminated limestone
claystone with moderate
with high organic
organic matter content
matter content

Massive limestone
with moderate organic
matter content

Laminated mud shale
with low organic
matter content

Laminated claystone
with low organic
matter content

Silty mudstone

Cb“A” represents chloroform bitumen “A”，HP represents horizontal permeability

Fig. 5

Reservoir characteristic column of Well Luo 69, Zhanhua sag

155

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

laminated structure: organic matter-rich laminated structure,
clastic-rich laminated structure, carbonate laminated structure
and clay laminated structure. Different assemblages and
proportions of laminated structures lead to different lithofacies
(Wang et al., 2012).
The types and structures of shale pores are determined by
various mineral compositions. The rigidity of quartz is favorable
for the preservation of inter-granular pore. The instability
of feldspar results in dissolution pores along the cleavage.
Carbonate minerals are not only easily dissolved to form intergranular or intra-granular dissolved pores and also easily
recrystallized to form inter-granular pores. Clay minerals are
often curly shaped flakes with considerable inter-granular pores.
Different mineral compositions also control the brittleness of

shale, and further influence the later reservoir reconstruction.
The higher content of brittle minerals such as quartz and calcite
can result formation of natural fractures. During fracturing and
stimulation, it is also easy to form complex induced fractures
and achieve the extension and connection of fracture networks.
However, the elastic deformation of clay minerals during
fracturing tends to block the channels, which is undesirable for
reservoir stimulation.
Through the investigation of the mineral compositions of shale
reservoirs in different regions (Table 2) (Chen et al., 2011; Liang
et al., 2012; Tang et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2012), the marine
shale usually have high siliceous content, while the lacustrine
shale usually have high content of carbonate minerals and the
content of clay mineral is generally lower than 50%.

Table 2 Rock mineral composition of shale reservoir in different regions
Strata

(Quartz + Feldspar)
/%

North America
Northern Guizhou

Barnett (C1)
∈1

40-60
32-78, average 56.3

< 25
< 20

40-80
40-70

< 50
8-47, average 30.5

Es3x
P 2l
Eh3s

3-48, average 18
20-40
34-57

average 58
5-48
23-31

average 78
/
68-83

1-48, average 19
/
16.9-31.5

Ordos Basin
Bonan sag
Malang sag
Biyang sag

Pz2
Mz

32-54
27-47

3.3 Characteristics of reservoiring and seepage
space in shale
Sha le reser voi r cha racter istics a re deter m ined by the
compositions and structures of fine-grained mudstone and shale.
The tight reservoir generally has low matrix porosity, small
radius of pore throat and extremely low original permeability.
Desirable measurements cannot be obtained when using
conventional methods to analyze the petrophysical properties
of shale reservoirs, such as casting thin section, porosity and
permeability measurement, and mercury injection. Therefore,
special imaging techniques and analysis testing methods should
be adopted in characterizing mudstone and shale reservoirs. For
instance, high-resolution imaging instruments, such as argon ion
polishing and sampling equipment, three-dimensional micro/
nano imaging X-ray computed tomography (CT), Field Emission
Scanning Electron Microscope (FE _SEM), environment
scanning electron microscopy, need to be used in order to
realize the 3D distribution image reconstruction of internal
shale pores and mineral compositions (Slatt and O’Brien, 2011;
Loucks et al., 2012). The structure and distribution of pores
and micro-fractures in shale can be effectively characterised by
measuring the surface area of N2 and CO2 under low pressure in
combination with energy spectrum analysis (Tian et al., 2012).
Numerous studies have been done on the evolution of
reservoiring space and pores in shales (Slatt and O’Brien, 2011;

156

Carbonate mineral
Brittle mineral /%
/%

Clay mineral
/%

Region

/
/

40-58
58-70

/
/

Loucks et al., 2012; Zhu et al., 2012). It is considered that the
shale reservoiring space can be summarized into four categories:
intergranular pore, intra-granular pore, organic matter pore
and fracture. The development of pore network depends on the
composition and structure of minerals, while the content and
type of organic matter are critical to the development of organic
pore. Pore type is also closely related with diagenesis.
By obs e r v i ng c or e sa mples of sha les i n t he Biya ng,
Zhanhua and Dongying sags with the use of transmitted
light microscope and argon ion polishing FE-SEM, shale
reservoiring spaces in these areas consists mainly of matrix
pores, fractures. The aperture of matrix pores and fractures
ranges from micro-nanometer to nanometer scales. Nanoscale
pores and fractures are dominant, while micro-fractures are
well developed. The types of matrix pore mainly include
residual original intergranular pores, intergranular pores (Fig.
6a-Fig. 6c), secondary pores formed by the dissolution of
unstable mineral (Fig. 6d) and organic pores. Organic pores
can be also divided into three types: pores on the contact
edge of organic matter and clastic grains, pores formed by
the dissolution of organic matter lumps and hydrocarbon
conversion pores (Table 3, Fig. 6).
Organic pores are lipophilic and generally anhydrous, providing
an important reservoiring place for shale oil and gas. The
formation and enrichment of organic pores are controlled

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

(a)

2µm

(b)

2.5µm

(c)

25µm

(d)

2.5µm

(e)

1µm

(f)

5µm

(g)

2.5µm

(h)

100µm

(i)

250µm

(a) Clay mineral intracrystalline pore, the 3rd Member of the Hetaoyuan Formation, Biyang sag, Well Biye HF-1 at 2441.6 m; (b) Pyrite
intracrystalline pore, the 3rd Member of the Hetaoyuan Formation, Biyang sag, Well Biye HF-1 at 2441.6 m; (c) Calcite recrystallization
intracrystalline pore, the 3rd Member of the Hetaoyuan Formation, Biyang sag, Well Biye HF-1 at 2447.5 m; (d) Dissolved fracture along
the cleavage in feldspar, the 3rd Member of the Hetaoyuan Formation, Biyang sag, Well Biye HF-1 at 2441.6 m; (e) Pores formed by
hydrocarbon generation and evolution of organic matter, the Lower 3rd Member of the Shahejie Formation, Dongying sag, Well Niu-38
at 3350 m; (f) Pores formed by organic acid dissolution pore, the 3rd Member of the Hetaoyuan Formation, Biyang sag, Well Biye HF-1
at 2423.6 m; (g) Pores at the margin of organic matter, the lower part of Member 3 of the Shahejie Formation, Dongying sag, Well Niu-1
at 3426.2 m; (h) Interlayered micro-fracture, the 3rd Member of the Hetaoyuan Formation, Biyang sag, Well Biye HF-1 at 2437.25 m; (i)
Tectonic micro-fracture, the 3rd Member of the Hetaoyuan Formation, Biyang sag, Well Biye HF-1 at 2443.3 m.

Fig. 6

Characteristics of micro-reservoiring space in shales

Table 3 Types and characteristics of micro pores in shale oil reservoirs
Pore type

Organic pore

Pore carrier

Shape

Size/nm

Abundance

Connectivity

In organic matter

Honeycomb and bubble
shape

50-300

Low

Better

Elongated and slit shape

100-800

High

Poor

Long and irregular
shape

100-1500

Relatively high

Moderate

Between organic matter and
clastic grains

In the dissolved organic matter
lumps
Dissolution pore

Calcite, feldspar, clay mineral

Elongated and
embayment shape

200-2000

Relatively high

Good

Intercrystal pore

Clay minerals, pyrite, calcite
recrystallization crystal

Oval, square and
elongated shape

80-800

Moderate

Moderate

Inter-granular pore

Quartz, feldspar, mica sheet

Square shape

100-1500

Mid-low

Bad

157

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

by the abundance, type and evolution degrees of the organic
matter. More specifically, organic pores are formed under the
following conditions: (1) in kerogen after the solid kerogen
converts into hydrocarbon fluid (Fig. 6e), (2) by the formation
of bubbles during the generation of liquid hydrocarbons or the
accumulation of hydrocarbon gas, (3) through the dissolution of
calcite and clay minerals by organic acids (Fig. 6f). It is worthy
to note that compared with shale gas reservoirs, the organic
matter in oil shale has a relatively low degree of evolution, and
has not reached the gas generation window. For this reason, the
development of the nanoscale hydrocarbon conversion pores in
shale oil reservoirs is quite limited. The elongated and slit pores
are mostly observed at the contact edge of organic matter and
matrix particles, with the width of 100-800 nm (Fig. 6g). This
kind of pores has high abundance and large sizes, and is thought
to be the inter-granular pores between the organic matter and the
matrix which are not fully compacted. In addition, the volume
of organic matter usually shrinks to some degree after thermal
evolution and the expulsion of hydrocarbon fluids, thus forming
pores between itself and the mineral matrix around.
Micro-fractures are quite often developed in shale oil reservoirs
with various types, such as structural fracture, interlayer seam,
mineral contraction fracture, and hydrocarbon-generating
overpressure seam with different geneses. Among them, the
horizontal interlayer seam is mostly well developed; mechanical
property varies greatly at the contacts of different laminae,
usually resulting in long, parallel continuous cracks with
widths of 2-8 μm (Fig. 6h). The mineral contraction fractures
are mainly developed in clay minerals, and formed by the
transformation and dehydration of clay minerals as well as the
hydrocarbon expulsion of organic matter during the diagenetic
process. The interlayer shrinkage of flake-like clay minerals
forms contraction fractures. However, tectonic micro-fracture
is mainly oblique with flat fracture surface and disconnected
laminae, and is mostly filled by carbonate minerals (Fig. 6i).
Micro-fractures not only provide seepage channels for shale
reservoirs, but also play an important role in connecting
hydrocarbons and improving the petrophysical properties.
They can also facilitate reservoir stimulation by intersecting
with artificial fractures to form effective multi-scale fracture
networks.

3.4 Stimulation conditions of shale reservoirs
For shale oil reservoirs which have low porosity and extremelylow permeability, horizontal wells and artificial fracturing
must be used in a large scale in order to improve the production
ability within reservoirs. Shale reservoir stimulation should take
into account the buried depth and rock fracturing availability,
in which the latter is dependent on the development degrees of
natural fractures, mineral compositions and rock mechanical
properties (Tang et al., 2012).

158

Burial depths have some impact on the physical properties
of reservoirs. With increasing depth, the compaction effect is
enhanced, while the porosity and permeability of reservoirs are
reduced. The increase of burial depth results in high costs for well
drilling and completion, etc., thus reducing the economic value of
reservoirs. Natural fractures in shale can reduce the tensile strength
of rock, which can also enhance the effect of fracturing. If natural
fractures are well-developed, it will be easier to form artificially
induced fractures. In terms of shale mineral compositions, the
higher percentage of brittle minerals and the lower content of
clay minerals can lead to the larger shale brittleness and greater
fracturing availability. As for the mechanics properties of rocks,
the commonly used characterization parameters include Young’s
modulus and Poisson’s ratio. The former reflects the rigidity of rock,
which is the ability of shale to hold fractures after fracturing, while
Poisson’s ratio reflects the rock elasticity, which determines the
ability of shale to rupture under pressure. Thus, the higher Young’s
modulus and lower Poisson’s ratio can result in greater fracturing
availability of shale.

3.5 Accumulation mechanisms of shale oil
At present, there are not so much researches on hydrocarbon
generation and expulsion, relevant simulation experiments,
as well as the retention mechanism and occurrence state of
residual hydrocarbons in shale. The simulation experiment of
hydrocarbon generation and expulsion in the confined space of
source rocks, indicated that the process could be divided into
different stages as the maturity increases with the increasing of
the thermal evolution degree (Li et al., 2011; Guang et al., 2012).
When Ro is less than 0.9%, the generated oil is mainly retained
in the source rocks. If Ro is greater than 0.9%, the expelled oil
from the source rock can be retained on the surface of the source
rocks and in the connected micro-fractures, part of the oil can
enter the interbedded sandstones. Most scholars hold the view
that the process of hydrocarbon release and expulsion includes
the generation and release of hydrocarbons from kerogen and
the primary migration of hydrocarbons in the source rocks.
During the first stage, the release of liquid hydrocarbons is
controlled by the adsorption effect of kerogen and the diffusion
effect of hydrocarbons in the kerogen network, which depends
mainly on the chemical properties of the kerogen. During
the second stage, the controlling factors of the retained
hydrocarbons in the mudstone and shale include the lithological
assemblage of source rocks, effective migration channels, stress
distribution in the source rocks and micro-fracture development
(Pepper and Corvi, 1995; Stainforth, 2009). The occurrence state
of residual hydrocarbons is mainly controlled by the organic
and inorganic mineral compositions in shale, reservoiring
space structures, hydrocarbon compositions and properties.
Through analyzing and observing with FE-SEM, Zou put
forward a retention and accumulation model for shale oil, liquid

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

hydrocarbons are considered to mainly occur in the internal or
on the surface of organic matter in an adsorption phase; in the
nanoscale pore throat of mineral matrix (clay, quartz, feldspar,
dolomite and calcite), liquid hydrocarbons occur mostly in a free
state, sometimes in an adsorption state; hydrocarbons mainly
exist as free state in micro fractures (Zou et al., 2013).
Shale oil is originated from the retention and accumulation of
generated hydrocarbons in the source rocks. It is the residual
oil which has not been expelled after hydrocarbon generation.
Shale oil experiences no migration or only primary migration,
which is a typical self-generating and self-reservoiring system.
During the continuous oil generation stage of organic-rich
shale, the retention and accumulation of oil is controlled by
various factors such as reservoiring space structure, medium
lipophilicity or hydrophility and crude oil properties. Shale
oil mainly exists as free, adsorbed or dissolved state in large
fractures, matrix pores, micro-fractures and other lithologic
inter-layers of shale. Shale oil may be accumulated in organicrich shale within oil generation window. Shale oil reservoirs are
usually characterized by large oil-bearing area and continuous
distribution of reservoir bodies. The oil-bearing magnitude is
controlled by the distribution of organic-rich shales.

4 Elements and criteria of shale oil
reservoir evaluation
Based on the “self-generating and self-reserving” accumulation
model for shale oil and the requirement of fracturing and
stimulation for reservoir development, it is considered that the
evaluation of shale oil reservoir should focus on the oil generation
potential, reserving capacity, stimulation conditions and shale oil
mobility. Evaluation parameters can be summarized as: organic
geochemical parameters which characterize the conditions of
oil sources (including the type and maturity of kerogen, organic
matter abundance, and rock pyrolysis parameters), reservoir

property parameters of accumulation conditions for shale oil
(the area, thickness, porosity-permeability parameter, oilbearing abundance of organic-rich shale), and the parameters
indicating exploitation conditions (including buried depth, rock
mineral compositions, the development of fractures, mechanical
parameters rock, the viscosity of crude oil, and formation
pressure), among which the organic geochemical parameters are
the most important to reflect oil source conditions.

4.1 Reservoir evaluation elements
4.1.1 Type and maturity of organic matter
The generation and accumulation of shale oil is controlled by the
type of organic matter and the stage of thermal evolution stage.
Type-III organic matter is mainly for gas generation, and has low
shale oil production rate no matter under what stage of evolution.
Type-I and Type-II organic matters have low shale oil production
rate prior to the oil generation (window) stages, or the low and
high maturity stages due to the limited amount of generated oil
or the conversion of oil into gas. However, during the mature
stage (0.7% < Ro < 1.1%), shale oil is in the enrichment window
with high production rate (transformation ratio). Therefore, the
target shale oil reservoir evaluation should be the low mature and
mature source rocks with Type-I and Type-II1 organic matters and
Ro of 0.6%-1.2%, based on which classification and evaluation can
be achieved according to the abundance of organic matter.
4.1.2 TOC
Through analyzing the controlling factors and effects of organic
matter on the oil content and reservoiring capability of shale
oil reservoirs, it is clear that the production capacity of shale oil
reservoir is primarily controlled by organic matter abundance.
Based on the statistics of shale oil testing and production (Table
4), it can be observed that the average TOC in oil-testing wells is

Table 4 Parameters of shale oil wells in different regions
Production /(m3·d-1)
Region

Zhanhua sag

Strata

Well

Before
fracturing

After
fracturing

0.69
79.90
2.30
1.80
24.00

2.09

Es3x

Luo 67
Luo 42
Luo 20
Luo 19
Xinyishen 9
Biye HF1

Biyang sag

Es3s
Anshen 1

Shulu sag

Es3x

Jin 97
Jin 116x

9.20
1.98

Stable production of 2.50 after
fracturing, with maximum of
23.60
Stable production of 0.50 after
fracturing, with maximum of
4.68
0.89

17.70
12.10

TOC (%) in oil testing
member

Porosity

1.63-3.85, average 2.74;
3.27-7.73, average 5.02
3.48-5.50, average 4.62

4.12-8.75, average 5.99
4.80-18.70, average 10.11
3.42-12.90, average 8.47

0.50-4.02, average 2.18

5.75-11.30, average 9.21

2.16-4.96, average 3.40

2.32-7.19, average 4.80

Average 3.03
Average 3.96
Average 2.17

159

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

higher than 2%. Higher TOC leads to higher shale oil production.
When TOC reaches over 4%, the production will be even larger.
Based on production data and survey results in combination
with the effect range of TOC on carbonate crystal morphology,
it is believed that if other conditions are satisfied, the lower limit
value of TOC for the accumulation and industrial recovery of
shale oil should be no less than 2%, and the boundary values
is 2% and 4%. When TOC < 2%, the reservoirs are considered
invalid, and basically no oil will be produced even if fracturing
stimulation is performed. When 2% < TOC < 4%, the reservoir
is deemed to have low abundance and industrial oil flow after
fracturing, or may have natural low yields. When TOC > 4%, the
reservoirs have high abundance with certain natural productivity
and industrial value as well as high single-well yields and a
prolonged period of stable production. The types and maturity
thresholds of organic matter vary in different regions. Therefore,
a difference exists in the comparability of TOC. The evaluation of
reservoirs cannot only depend on TOC. We suggest that regional
TOC boundary values should be analyzed and determined in the
regions with large amount of local data. In regions with less data,
it is recommended to use the TOC of 2.0% and 4.0% as the tripledivision threshold for shale oil reservoir and capacity evaluation.

and comprises complex compositions and varies types. Based
on the important role of organic matter in shale sedimentation,
d iagenesis a nd r es e r voi r for m at ion, we sug gest t hat
characteristics of organic matter should be taken into account
and the composition should be taken as the first principle in
classifying shale types. The type of shale is determined by both
the content of organic carbon and rock mineral compositions
(Fig. 7). According to the three basic elements of TOC,
carbonate mineral and clay mineral, and with TOC boundary
values of 2% and 4%, shales are subdivided into high-organic,
moderate-organic and low-organic types.
Based on the shale oil exploration in the Luojia in the Zhanhua
sag, the most favorable lithofacies is thought to be the laminated
limestone and calcareous shale with high content of brittle
mineral and organic carbon after recrystallization. Such
lithofacies is mainly distributed in the relatively isolated semideep lake facies zone below the storm wave base, with high
content of organic matter, and is commonly found within the
transgressive system tract.
TOC/%

4.1.3 Thickness of organic-rich shale
The oil content and economic benefit of shale reservoirs are
controlled by shale thickness. The thicker the organic-rich
shale is, the higher the enrichment degree of shale oil will be.
At present, there is no unified understanding of the lower limit
of shale reservoir thickness. In the U.S., the thickness of shale
formation is defined as no less than 30 m, and the thickness of
effective shale is no less than 9 m (Wang et al., 2010). It is also
required to consider other factors when determining the lower
limit of shale reservoir thickness. If the organic carbon content
is higher, the lower limit can be smaller. Due to the fact that the
domestic exploration of shale oil is still at the starting stage, it is
suggested to set the lower limit of thickness to be 40 m for those
shale formations suitable for commercial development, and set the
effective thickness of rich-organic shale to be no less than 15 m.

II

I
4

4
IV

III
2

2
VI

V
Carbonate
/%

25

50

25

Clay
/%

I: limestone with high content of organic matter; II: argillite rock with high content of
organic matter; III: limestone with moderate amount of organic matter; IV: argillite
rock with moderate amount of organic matter; V: limestone with low content of
organic matter; VI: argillite rock with low content of organic matter

Fig. 7

Classification of shales

4.1.4 Rock mineral compositions

4.1.6 Fracturing availability of shale

Different mineral compositions not only control pore structures,
but also influence the late reservoir stimulation. High content
of brittle minerals is easy to form natural fractures and
induced fractures. Clay minerals are prone to block seepage
channels, which is not conducive to reservoir stimulation. It is
recommended that the content of brittle minerals in high-quality
shale reservoir should be greater than 50%, while the content of
clay mineral should be less than 40%.

The larger the Young’s modulus is, the higher the degree of
natural fracture development is. The lower the Poisson’s ratio is,
the higher the brittle mineral content is, and the lower the clay
content is. As a result, the fracturing availability of shales will be
greater. It is proposed by Jiang et al. that a good shale reservoir
should satisfy the following conditions: a Poisson’s ratio < 0.25, a
Young’s modulus value > 20 GPa, a brittle mineral content > 40%
and a clay mineral content < 30% (Jiang et al., 2010).

4.1.5 Rock type

4.1.7 Mobility of shale oil

Mudstone and shale usually consist of fine-grained sediments

Besides the characteristics of shale oil reservoirs and ability of

160

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

fracturing, the capacity of reservoirs is another key factor of
shale oil exploration and development, which is closely related
to the mobility of shale oil, and greatly affected by reservoir
permeability, density and viscosity of crude oil and formation
pressure. Low density and low viscosity of crude oil, high
formation pressure and high gas-oil ratio are usually favorable
for the flow and development of shale oil in micro/nanoscale
pore throats.
In view of the low original permeability of matrix-type shale
oil, artificial fracturing is used to enhance permeability.
Fracture-typed shale oil reser voi rs usually have la rge
variations in permeability. So far, there is no unified standard
for measuring permeability in situ. Therefore, further studies
on the seepage mechanisms and production conditions of shale
oil are required.

4.2 Reservoir evaluation criteria and application
Based on the above analysis, a comprehensive evaluation standard
of shale oil reservoir with a focus on organic carbon content is
formulated through practical researches and extensive investigation
(Huang et al., 2004; Jiang et al., 2010; Mullen et al., 2010; Zhang
et al., 2012; Luo et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013; Yu, 2012; Zou
et al., 2013). The parameters that are closely related to shale oil
capacity are selected, and the threshold values of TOC are 2%
and 4% respectively. Meanwhile, a wide range of indicators are
comprehensively considered, including the thickness, porosity,
percentages of brittle minerals, clay mineral content and rock
mechanical parameters of the organic-rich shale. This evaluation
divides shale oil reservoirs into 3 categories (Table 5).

This evaluation criterion can be applied to the classification
of individual well reservoir. The measured TOC data and
logging data are firstly used to establish the geochemical
logging response model, so as to systematically determine the
vertical variations in TOC values of the target shale horizons
in each well. Then different levels of shale oil reservoirs can be
classified based on the above criterion. Taking the Biyang sag as
an example, single well reservoir classification and evaluation
is carried out on Well Biye HF-1 using the above criterion (Fig.
8). The TOC ranges mainly within 1.5%-3.5%, therefore the
reservoirs of this well belong to Type Ⅱ on the whole .
The planar application of the criterion is to delineate the
distribution of favorable shale reservoir area through multiparameter superimposition in combination with various
graphs including the basic TOC contour map, Ro contour map,
lithofacies planar distribution map, brittle mineral content
contour map, organic-rich shale thickness contour map, porosity
contour map and fracture development planar map.

5 Conclusions
(1) Shale oil refers to the liquid hydrocarbons in mudstone
and shale formations which serve as effective source rocks.
“Tight oil” and “shale oil” can be defined in both broad and
narrow senses. In a broad sense shale oil refers to the oil
resources in tight oil-bearing layers (including non-mudstone
and shale and interlayer of other rock types) of shale with low
porosity and permeability, whereas in a narrow sense shale oil
specifically refers to the oil resources in mudstone-shale. Shale
oil reservoir can be divided into fracture-type and matrix-type

Table 5 Evaluation parameters and criteria of shale oil reservoir
Brittle
mineral/%

Clay
mineral/%

Young’s
modulus/
GPa

Poisson’s
ratio

>6

>50

<40

>20

<0.25

≥10

≥4

≥40

≤50

≥18

≤0.20

<10

<4

<40

>50

<18

>0.20

Reservoir type

TOC
/%

Ro
/%

Target reservoir
(Type I)

>4

0.7-1.1

>40

>15

Favorable reservoir
(Type II)

2-4

≥0.5

≥30

Invalid reservoir
(Type III)

<2

<0.5

<30

Shale
Organic-rich
Porosity/%
thickness/m thickness/m

according to the differences in reservoiring mechanisms and
production.
(2) Basically shale oil reservoirs are characterized by high
abundant organic matter, complex mineral compositions,
development of laminated structure, tiny reservoiring space,
micro/ nanoscale pore throats, low porosity, extremely low
permeability. Shale oil is originated from the crude oil

that has not been expelled after hydrocarbon generation
or retained after hydrocarbon expulsion. It retains and
accumulates within shale reservoirs with no migration or
only primary migration. Shale oil exists as free, dissolved
or a d s or b e d l iqu id hyd r o c a r b on s i n la rge f r a c t u r e s,
matrix pores and micro-fractures in mudstone and shale
formations.

161

1

GR
50

2390

300

RT

150

5000

AC

Brittle
mineral
/%

Clay
/%

380 0

50 0

100

S 1 + S 2 Porosity PermeabilityOil bearing
/(mg· g -1 )
abundance
/%
/%

TOC
/%
0

7

0

40

0

15

0

0.04

0

/%

5

Reservoir
evaluation

Lithologic
profile

Fracture

Strata

Depth
/m

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

Ⅲ
2400

Ⅱ
2410

Ⅲ

2420

No. 5 major shale horizon

Member 3 of Hetaoyuan Formation

√
Ⅱ

√
2430

Ⅲ

√
√
√
√

2440

Ⅱ

√
2450

2460

2470

Ⅲ

2480

Muddy
siltstone

Fig. 8

Silty shale with
moderate and low
content of TOC

Calcareous shale with
low and moderate
content of TOC

Dolomite shale with
moderate and low
content of TOC

Argillaceous dolomite
with moderate and low
content of TOC

The comprehensive evaluation column of shale oil reservoirs in Well BY-HF1, Biyang sag

(3) Organic matter plays an important role in the formation and
evaluation of shale oil reservoirs. The objective of shale oil reservoir
evaluation is to delineate the low-mature and mature source rock
with Type-I and Type-II1 organic matters and Ro of 0.5%-1.0%.
A set of shale oil reservoir evaluation criteria was proposed with
a focus on the abundance of organic carbon and TOC threshold
values of 2% and 4%. Meanwhile, different indicators should be
taken into account, including the thickness of organic matter-rich

162

Calcareous shale with
high and moderate
content of TOC

shale, mineral compositions, rock types, porosity and permeability,
and fractures. Shale oil reservoir can be divided into three grades,
i.e., target reservoir, favorable reservoir and invalid reservoir.

Acknowledegments
This work was funded by National Science and Technology
Major Project of China (Grant No. 2011ZX05009-002)

Z. Jiang et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,149-163

References
Chen X, Wang M, Yan Y X, et al. Accumulation conditions for continental
shale oil and gas in the Biyang Depression. Oil & Gas Geology, 2011,
32(4): 568-577(in Chinese with English abstract).
EIA. Annual energy outlook 2016, with projections to 2040. Washington:
US Energy Information Administration, 2016.
Guan D F, Xu X H, Li Z M, et al. Theory study of hydrocarbon generation
and expulsion of source rocks and oil and gas in shale. Sino-Global
Energy, 2012, 17(5): 40-52(in Chinese with English abstract).
Jarvie D M, Hill R J, Ruble T E, et al. Unconventional shale-gas systems:
the Mississippian Barnett Shale of north-central Texas as one model for
thermogenic shale-gas assessment. AAPG Bulletin, 2007, 91(4): 475499.
Jia C Z, Zou C N, Li J Z, et al. Assessment criteria, main types, basic
features and resource prospects of the tight oil in China. Acta Petrolei
Sinica, 2012, 33(3): 343-349(in Chinese with English abstract).
Jiang Y Q, Dong D Z, Qi L, et al. Basic features and evaluation of shale gas
reservoirs. Natural Gas Industry, 2010, 30(10): 7-12(in Chinese with
English abstract).
Li Z M, Zheng L J, Ma Z L, et al. Simulation of source rock for hydrocarbon
generation and expulsion in finite space and its significance. Petroleum
Geology & Experiment, 2011, 33(5): 447-451(in Chinese with English
abstract).
Liang S J, Huang Z L, Liu B, et al. Formation mechanism and enrichment
conditions of Lucaogou Formation shale oil from Malang sag,
Santanghu Basin. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2012, 33(4): 588-594(in Chinese
with English abstract).
Lin S H, Zou C N, Yuan X J, et al. Status quo of tight oil exploitation in the
United States and its implication. Lithologic Reservoirs, 2011, 34(2): 2530(in Chinese with English abstract).
Loucks R G, Reed R M, Ruppel S C, et al. Spectrum of pore types and
networks in mudrocks and a descriptive classification for matrix-related
mudrock pores. AAPG Bulletin, 2012, 96(6): 1071-1098.
Lu S F, Huang W B, Chen F W, et al. Classification and evaluation criteria
of shale oil and gas resources: discussion and application. Petroleum
Exploration and Development, 2012, 39(2): 249-255(in Chinese with
English abstract).
Luo Y, Zhao Y C, Lü X H. Characterization of the upper Es3 inter-salt shale

reservoir in Liutun sag, Dongpu Depression. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2013,
34(2): 293-300(in Chinese with English abstract).
Miao J Y, Zhu Z Q, Liu W R, et al. Relationship between occurrence
of organic matter and the primary migration of the hydrocarbon in
argillaceous rock. Acta Sedimentologica Sinica, 2004, 22(1): 169-175(in
Chinese with English abstract).
M iller B, Pa neitz J, Mul len M. T he successf ul appl ication of a
compartmental completion technique used to isolate multiple hydraulicfracture treatments in horizontal Bakken shale wells in North Dakota.
SPE 116469, 2008.
Mills R M. The myth of the oil crisis: overcoming the challenges of
depletion, geopolitics, and global warming. Westport: State of
Connecticut, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2008: 158-159.
Mullen J, Lowry J C, Nwabuoku K C. Lessons learned developing the eagle
ford shale. SPE 138446, 2010.
Pepper A S, Corvi P J. Simple kinetic models of petroleum formation: Part

I: Oil and gas generation from kerogen. Marine and Petroleum Geology,
1995, 12(3): 291-319.
Slatt R M, O’Brien N R. Pore types in the Barnett and Woodford gas shales:
contribution to understanding gas storage and migration pathways in
fine-grained rocks. AAPG Bulletin, 2011, 95(12): 2017-2030.
Sonnenberg S A, Pramudito A. Petroleum geology of the giant Elm Coulee
field, Williston Basin. AAPG Bulletin, 2009, 93(9): 1127-1153.
Stainforth J G. Practical klinetic modeling of petroleum generation and
expulsion. Marine and Petroleum Geology, 2009, 26(4): 552-572.
Tang Y, Xing Y, Li L Z, et al. Influence factors and evaluation methods
of the gas shale fracability. Earth Science Frontiers, 2012, 19(5): 356363(in Chinese with English abstract).
Tian H, Zhang S C, Liu S B, et al. Determination of organic-rich shale pore
features by mercury injection and gas adsorption methods. Acta Petrolei
Sinica, 2012, 33(3): 419-427(in Chinese with English abstract).
Wang G M, Ren Y J, Zhong J H, et al. Genetic analysis on lamellar calcite
veins in Paleogene black shale of the Jiyang Depression. Acta Geologica
Sinica, 2005, 79(6): 834-838(in Chinese with English abstract).
Wang G M. Laminae combination and genetic classification of Eogene shale
in Jiyang Depression. Journal of Jilin University: Earth Science Edition,
2012, 42(3): 666-671(in Chinese with English abstract).
Wang H J, Ma F, Tong X G, et al. Assessment of global unconventional
oil and gas resources. Petroleum Exploration and Development, 2016,
43(6): 850-862 (in Chinese with English abstract).
Wang X, Liu Y H, Zhang M, et al. Conditions of formation and accumulation
for shale gas. Natural Gas Geoscience, 2010, 21(2): 350-356(in Chinese
with English abstract).
Wang Y S, Li Z, Gong J Q, et al. Discussion on an evaluation method of
shale oil and gas in Jiyang Depression: a case study on Luojia area in
Zhanhua sag. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2013, 34(1): 83-90(in Chinese with
English abstract).
Yu B S. Particularity of shale gas reservoir and its evaluation. Earth Science
Frontiers, 2012, 19(3): 252-258(in Chinese with English abstract).
Zhang J C, Lin LM, Li Y X, et al. Classification and evaluation of shale oil.
Earth Science Frontiers, 2012, 19(5): 322-331(in Chinese with English
abstract).
Zhang S W, Wang Y S, Zhang L Y, et al. Formation conditions of shale oil
and gas in Bonan sub-sag, Jiyang Depression. Engineering Science,
2012, 14(6): 49-55(in Chinese with English abstract).
Zhou Q F, Yang G F. Definition and application of tight oil and shale oil
terms. Oil & Gas Geology, 2012, 3(4): 541-544(in Chinese with English
abstract).
Zhu R F, Zhang L Y, Li J Y, et al. Organic matter reservoir space of shale
in Dongying sag, Bohai Bay Basin. Petroleum Geology & Experiment,
2012, 34(4): 352-356(in Chinese with English abstract).
Zou C N, Yang Z, Cui J W, et al. Formation mechanism, geological
characteristics and development strategy of nonmarine shale oil in
China. Petroleum Exploration and Development, 2013, 40(1): 14-26(in
Chinese with English abstract).
Zou C N, Zhu R K, Wu S T, et al. Types, characteristics, genesis
and prospects of conventional and unconventional hydrocarbon
accumulations: taking tight oil and tight gas in China as an instance.
Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2012, 33(2): 173-187(in Chinese with English
abstract).

163

