Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Petroleum Research
journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/
petroleum-research/

Full Length Article

New advances in the assessment of tight oil resource in China
Shejiao Wang*, Yuanjiang Yu, Qiulin Guo, Shaoyong Wang, Xiaozhi Wu
PetroChina Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration and Development, Beijing 100083, China

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 15 July 2016
Received in revised form
14 November 2016
Accepted 18 November 2016
Available online 1 July 2017

The research on tight oil becomes another hotspot in the ﬁeld of unconventional oil and gas after the
boom of shale gas. The global recoverable resources of tight oil are estimated to be around 47.3  109 t. In
recent years, signiﬁcant progress has been made in the technologies of tight oil exploration and
development in North America, thus stimulating the dramatic increase of tight oil production. Meanwhile, China has also acquired remarkable achievements in tight oil exploration. Mature assessment
methods have been established for tight oil resources by the US, generally dominated by analogy and
statistical methods with their own advantages and disadvantages as well as applicable conditions. In
China, improvement of resource evaluation techniques becomes an urgent issue in increasing tight oil
reserve and production. This study mainly discusses the resource evaluation methods and resource
enrichment characteristics of tight oil. Seven kinds of assessment methods in three categories (i.e.,
analogy, statistical and genetic method) and evaluation parameters have been preliminary established,
and are speciﬁcally applied in the Sichuan, Ordos, Songliao, Junggar, Bohai Bay and other tight oil basins
through the newly hierarchical resource abundance analogy method, the estimated ultimate recovery
(EUR) analogy method and the small-cell volumetric method. The preliminary evaluation results reveal
that China has great potential in tight oil resource, and the geological resources amount to 20  109 t,
providing a resource base for large-scale development.
© 2017 Chinese Petroleum Society. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Keywords:
Unconventional oil and gas
Resource assessment method
Resource potential
Resource enrichment characteristics
Tight oil

1. Introduction
The world is currently undergoing the third signiﬁcant energy
revolution characterized by the transformation from conventional
oil and gas to new energy, in which unconventional oil and gas
resources will no doubt be the most practical in future. The research
on tight oil has become a hotspot in the ﬁeld of unconventional oil
and gas after the boom of shale gas (Zou et al., 2012a). Hundreds of
oil companies in North America have shifted the focus from shale
gas to tight oil, thereby contributing to the progress of exploration
and development technologies of tight oil as well as rapid increase
in production. America ﬁrst realized the transition from conventional to unconventional resources and now holds a leading position in the ﬁeld of tight oil exploration and development (Zou et al.,
2012a). The tight oil production in America reached 30  106 t in
2011 and was up to approximately 70  106 t in 2012.
Using the successful experiences in North America as a reference, China has stepped up efforts in tight oil exploitation and
development, and made signiﬁcant achievements in recent years
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: wsj@petrochina.com.cn (S. Wang).
Peer review under responsibility of Petroleum Research.

(Liang et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012; Zhao and Du, 2012; Yang et al.,
2013; Jiang et al., 2014). A series of commercial oil ﬂows have been
obtained in many tight oil wells in the Ordos, Junggar, Sichuan,
Bohai Bay, Songliao and other large-scale hydrocarbon-bearing
basins, indicating a favorable exploration situation in China. The
scale of tight oil resources is the key in making strategic deployment by some oil companies. The assessment of tight oil resources
and technical improvement are thus particularly urgent in
increasing tight oil reserves and production in China.
We have carried out a key technological research and development program of unconventional oil and gas assessment. During
the course of implementation, the new progress on tight oil
exploration and development and the related assessment methods
in North America were reviewed and investigated, and China's tight
oil enrichment characteristics were analyzed (Jia, 2012; Jia et al.,
2012; Pang et al., 2012; Zou et al., 2012b). By learning tight oil
assessment methods and the related key parameters in North
America, the tight oil assessment methods ﬁtting the geologic
features of China were established and applied in some basins.
According to the preliminary assessment results, China has great
tight oil potential in lacustrine basins and thus possesses a resource
base for large-scale development.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ptlrs.2017.06.005
2096-2495/© 2017 Chinese Petroleum Society. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

2

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

2. Review of tight oil assessment methods
Unconventional resources occupy increasingly important roles
in global oil and gas exploration and exploitation, among which
tight oil is very important and approachable. The researches on
tight oil assessment methods and techniques have attracted
extensive attentions in recent years. Based on the theory of “energy
triangle”, some scholars determined the quantitative relation between conventional and unconventional resources and then made
assessments on the unconventional resources using results of
conventional resources as a reference (Cheng et al., 2010). However,
this evaluation method is somewhat rough. Through investigations
on the related literature and academic exchange materials, it was
found that several mature assessment methods have been established for tight oil resources overseas, generally dominated by
analogy and statistical methods. As listed in Table 1, the analogy
methods are represented by the FORSPAN method from the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) and the resource grid density
method from ExxonMobil Corporation. The statistical methods
mainly include the volumetric method, the estimated ultimate recovery (EUR), the stochastic simulation method, the discovery
process method and the oil and gas spatial distribution prediction
method (Chen et al., 2005; Chen and Osadetz, 2006a, 2006b;
Kenneth et al., 2013).
2.1. FORSPAN method
The FORSPAN method is a mainstream method for unconventional resource assessment proposed by USGS (Schmoker, 2005;
Dashtgard et al., 2008; Clarkson and Pedersen, 2011). This
method was ﬁrst developed by the John Grace Consulting Company
(Gautier, 1995) and then gained a wide application after modiﬁcation by Schmoker of USGS (Schmoker, 1999, 2002). In recent
years, Charpentier and Cook (2010) have made some signiﬁcant
improvements, especially in database, parameter distribution and
graphic output standard. Currently, FORSPAN is a sophisticated
assessment method, and the ‘cell’ in the current assessment grid
refers to the drainage area controlled by a well. To be speciﬁc, in the
region with wells, the distributions of some reservoir parameters
such as thickness, area, oil saturation, porosity and permeability as
well as the single-well recoverable reserves, the single-well
controlled area and the recovery ratio, were mainly investigated;
in the regions without wells and production data, the assessment
parameters are principally acquired through analogy. The FORSPAN

method is applicable to assess the remaining resource potential in
the developed regions, i.e., the remaining resources in the whole
assessment unit are estimated based on the simulation on the
parameter distribution and the calculation of resources in each cell.
2.2. EUR analogy method
This method was proposed on the basis of FORSPAN model.
Exxon Mobil Corporation established the resource grid density
method which can accurately assess the distribution of continuous
oil and gas resources by the analogy of EUR in each block (Fig. 1). In
2012, after modiﬁcation of this method, a multi-prong assessment
approach (MPAA) method comes into being. MPAA combines the
EUR analogy method and the volumetric method. Through the
analogy of EUR in each block and correction with the reservoir
volume, the predicted resources will be more reliable. Currently,
EUR analogy method has become the most common method for
evaluating tight oil resources abroad.
2.3. Stochastic simulation method
Stochastic simulation method is a new method proposed by
USGS recently. There were three deﬁciencies of the traditional
analogy methods (Olea et al., 2010): (I) the spatial relationship
among the EURs of different assessment units is neglected; (II) the
implicit information are not exported fully; (III) the assessment
results are somewhat contrary to the spatial distribution regularities. The stochastic simulation method was then proposed for
addressing these problems, which differs from analogy method in
the following aspects: (I) The development of algorithm from the
analogy method to the comprehensive assessment method which
the main method is the statistical method supplemented by the
analogy method. The stochastic simulation method of the
sequential Gaussian simulation algorithm is used in regions with
wells, while the analogy method is applied in regions without
wells, and the spatial relationship among EURs and the related
parameters are acquired through analogy, then the assessment is
conducted based on multi-point simulation. (II) The development
of geologic modeling. The parameters were previously determined
by triangular distribution, and now through the analysis of the
relationship among the spatial data, the spatial distribution model
of the parameters is established by the geo-statistical method. (III)
The development of the simulation cell from the original cell to the
earliest grid cell. The area of the new cell is small, or even smaller in

Table 1
Tight oil assessment methods.
Category

Method

Analogy
method

The resource of a target area is
evaluated by analogy with the
parameters of the known
assessment units, and solution is
acquired by Monto Carlo
stochastic simulation method.
In the spatial resources
Single-well reserves
estimation method, discovery distribution prediction method,
based on the statistics of the
process method, stochastic
discovered reservoirs, the oil and
simulation method,
gas distribution characteristics
volumetric method; spatial
are determined for the calculation
resources distribution
of resources.
prediction method
The resource is calculated
Pyrolysis analogy method
through the basin simulation
proposed of Humble
software.
Geochemical Services, U.S.

Statistical
method

Genetic
method

Estimated ultimate recovery
(EUR) analogy method,
FORSPAN method, resource
grid density method

Principle and Characteristics

Application
conditions

Advantages

Disadvantages

Moderate-and
high-exploration
regions

Input parameters are less, and Difﬁculty in the
determination of key
the mathematical model is
parameters and lack of
simple
considerations on the spatial
correlation of EUR

Moderate-and
high-exploration
regions

By taking the spatial position
relationships of parameters
into account, the spatial
distribution of resources is
calculated

A lots of parameters are
involved, the distribution of
the discovered reserves is
required and the calculation
process is complex

Moderate-and lowexploration regions

The geological distribution
characteristics and
accumulation of oil and gas
resources are systematically
understood

The basin simulation process
is complex and the
assessment period is long.

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

3

estimation unit. Then, the whole assessment area is divided into
several minimum estimation units and the resources are ﬁnally
estimated by calculating the reserves of each minimum estimation
units.
2.5. Volumetric method
It is a common assessment method for both conventional and
unconventional oil and gas resources. Through this method, The
Canadian Consulting Company assessed the tight oil reserves of the
Cardium Formation in Pembina Oilﬁeld in Western Canada Basin,
and got the distribution of tight oil abundances.
2.6. The oil/gas spatial distribution prediction method
It is a special statistical method (Chen et al., 2004; Liu et al.,
2010; Xie et al., 2011), and includes three different assessment
methods: the method based on the reservoir-forming mechanism
and the spatial data analysis, the stochastic simulation method
based on a geological model, the data analysis method of the
support vector machine (SVM). These three methods have similar
ideas and assessment processes except the mathematical statistical
analysis.
In summary, all methods have their own advantages/disadvantages and application conditions (Table 1). In practical applications
abroad, different assessment methods are selected based on the
geologic features of different basins.
3. Assessment parameters of tight oil resource
Tight oil resource assessment parameters include various parameters in the resource assessment method, and the geological
assessment parameters in the resource assessment. The former
refer to the parameters that are directly used in the calculation of
tight oil resources, while the latter are the geological risk assessment parameters in the resource analogy assessment.
3.1. Tight oil resource assessment parameters
Through analysis of the tight oil resource assessment methods,
there are several key parameters in the calculation of tight oil
resource.

Fig. 1. Modiﬁed resource grid density method proposed by ExxonMobil Corporation
(after Kenneth et al., 2013). (a) Initial resource density and block scopes. (b) Distribution of cumulative probabilities for well-controlled resources in various blocks.

the single-well controlled discharge region. Chen and Osadetz
(2013) used the stochastic simulation method based on the
geologic model to assess the resources of shale oil in the Upper
Cretaceous Cardium Formation in Western Canada Basin, and the
assessment results were veriﬁed by the single-well recoverable
reserves method. Fig. 2 shows the calculated shale oil abundances
of Western Canada Basin through the stochastic simulation method
(Chen and Osadetz, 2013).
2.4. EUR estimated method
This method, as a typical statistical method, was proposed by
Advanced Resources Informational (ARI) Company of the U.S. The
key is to use the scope controlled by a single well as the minimum

(1) EUR (  103 ton per well). EUR refers to the estimated ultimate recovery for a single well. For the developing well with
many years of production history, EUR can be predicted and
assessed by the trend prediction method through the gradual
decreased productivity. Then, based on the EUR of the
developing well, it can estimate the average EUR of the
exploratory well in the assessable area, and the tight oil reserves of the assessable area are thus calculated. EUR is a key
parameter that is most commonly used in unconventional oil
and gas assessment in the abroad. For the calculation of
single-well EUR, the key is to select a typical production well
as the calibration well, and then establish the EUR probability
distribution curve of different types of production wells,
which then serves as the basis for analogy assessment.
(2) Single-well controlled area (km2). This parameter is critical
in the application of EUR assessment method. The accuracy
of the single-well controlled area determines the resources
estimation precision of the EUR method. The single-well
controlled areas varied in different regions and different
well types. Normally, the single-well controlled area should
be determined based on reservoir research results. By taking
full advantage of dynamic analysis results to develop the

4

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

Fig. 2. Shale oil abundances of Western Canada Basin through the stochastic simulation method (Chen and Osadetz, 2013).

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

dynamic and static combining well network optimization
technique, the reasonable range of single-well controlled
area thus can be determined.
Effective porosity (%). Porosity is an important parameter in
reservoir assessment. Effective porosity is the ratio of the
volume of the interconnected pores to the total rock volume.
It can be classiﬁed into matrix porosity and fracture porosity.
Tight oil is mainly accumulated in the micro- and nanopores. According to the current reservoir classiﬁcation standard and the development practices in the world, the
porosity of a tight oil reservoir is usually smaller than 12%.
Based on the statistical data, the tight oil reservoirs can be
divided into three types, type-I reservoirs with a porosity
over 8%, type-II reservoirs with a porosity from 5% to 8%, and
type-III reservoirs with a porosity smaller than 5%, respectively. The type-III reservoirs are dominated by nanopores
and still possess certain resources, but due to the high
development cost, so it is difﬁcult for the economical
development.
Effective reservoir thickness (m). The effective thickness of
tight oil reservoir is the thickness of the reservoir with production capacity in the oil-bearing sequences, it is the most
critical assessment parameter to affect the calculation of
resources using the volumetric method,
Oil saturation (%). Oil saturation (So) also is a key parameter
in the calculation of tight oil resources using the volumetric
method, it refers to the ratio of the oil volume in the effective
pores of the oil-bearing rock (Vo) to the volume of effective
pores in the reservoir rock (Vp) (So ¼ Vo/Vp  100%).
Reservoir area (km2). Reservoir area is the most critical
parameter in tight oil resource assessment. The geological

resources and recoverable resources per unit area (the
resource abundance) are often used in the expression of the
resource assessment results, to illustrate the enrichment
degree of the resource in a region.
(7) Resource abundance (  103 t/km2). Resource abundance
refers to the tight oil reserves per unit area and commonly is
used in the analogy method. In some high-degree exploration regions, ﬁrstly the calibrated unit is established, and the
abundances of geological resources and recoverable resources in the unit are calculated; then, through the analogy
of the geological conditions between the unknown unit and
the calibrated unit, the analogy coefﬁcient of the unknown
unit is determined and thus the total resources can be
calculated.
(8) Recoverable coefﬁcient. This parameter is deﬁned as the ratio
of the recoverable tight oil resources to the total geological
resources. The recoverable coefﬁcient increases constantly
with improvement of the recovery technologies, therefore, it
just roughly reﬂect the recoverable condition in a certain
time. According to the tight oil exploitation practice over the
past several years in North America, the recoverable coefﬁcient varies greatly with type of tight oil and basin, and
generally ranges from 4% to 12%.
Table 2 lists the technically recoverable resources of unproven
tight oil in the U.S. in 2012. The assessment was conducted by U.S.
Energy Information Administration (EIA) using the EUR method. It
can be found that the most critical assessment parameters are the
area of assessment region, the single-well EUR and the single-well
controlled area (average interwell spacing) (EIA, 2012).

Table 2
Assessment results of tight oil resources of some basins in the U.S.
Basin

Zone

Austin Chalk
Eagle Ford
Anadarko
Woodford
Permian
Avalon/Bone Springs
Spraberry
Rocky Mountain basins Niobrara
Williston Bakkena
San Joaquin/Los Angeles Monterey/Santos
Total

Area/square mile Average well spacing/ Ratio of Ratio of Average EUR/106 Well number in Recoverable resources/
well per square mile untested potential barrel per well
potential area million barrels
area/%
area/%

Western Gulf

3200
3120
1313
1085
20,385
6522
2520

3
5
6
4
6
8
2
12

72
100
100
100
99
97
77
98

61
54
88
78
72
80
97
93

0.13
0.28
0.02
0.39
0.11
0.05
0.55
0.50

21 165
8665
16 375
4085
4636
127 451
9767
27 584
219 729

2688
2461
393
1593
510
6500
5372
13 709
33 226

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

3.2. Geological assessment parameters
Geological assessment parameters are required in the geological
risk analysis when using analogy method for tight oil assessment.
Generally, there are three types of parameters in the geological
assessment: (I) the reservoir condition parameters, mainly
including effective reservoir thickness, reservoir lithology, pore
type and effective porosity; (II) the source rock condition parameters, mainly including the effective thickness of source rock, the
content of organic carbon, maturity and the type of organic matter;
(III) the preservation conditions parameters, including lithology
and thickness of the sealing layer. During the establishment of
geological assessment parameters and the calculation of resources,
in order to facilitate calculating analogy coefﬁcient, the analogy
assessment standard of the above-mentioned ten parameters and
the scoring table should be formulated according to the geological
assessment results, in other words, ten parameters can be graded
and given different scores. Taking the porosity as an example, it
generally can be classiﬁed into four levels: the ﬁrst level with a
porosity over 10% and a score of 1e0.75, the second level with a
porosity of 10%e8% and a score of 0.75e0.5, the third level with a
porosity of 8%e5% and a score of 0.5e0.25, and the fourth level with
a porosity less than 5% and a score of 0.25e0. Various analogy coefﬁcients are then acquired through the analogy of geological parameters of the assessment area with the assessment standard. By
weighted all analogy coefﬁcients, the total analogy coefﬁcient of
the assessment area is acquired. Accordingly, it can be concluded
that the establishment of the geological assessment standards for
tight oil is the key to the analogy assessment.

5

2030. From the perspective of the current tight oil development
situation, the development speed and scale of tight oil may be
beyond the expectation in future.
5. Progress of tight oil assessment methods in China
Currently, the exploration degree of tight oil in China is quite
low. Many scholars applied the resource abundance analogy
method to predict resource, the process is as follows. On the base of
analysis of a known typical tight oil reservoir, the analogy parameters and assessment standard can be determined, the similarity
coefﬁcient is calculated according to the geological conditions for
the formation of tight oil in the assessment area, and the tight oil
resources can be calculated through the analogy method.
During a major research and development program of unconventional oil and gas resource assessment of PetroChina Company
Limited (PetroChina in short), we have carried out a systematic
study on tight oil assessment methods and preliminarily have
established a set of tight oil assessment methods which are suited
to the geological characteristics of China's continental sedimentary
geology (Guo et al., 2011, 2013a, 2013b) (Table 3). Among these
methods, the small-cell volumetric method, EUR method and hierarchical resource abundance analogy method are newly established and suitable to calculate resources of the region with high
exploration degree; whereas the volumetric method and the
analogy method are appropriate to estimate resources of the region
with low exploration degree. The key parameters of the resource
assessment mainly include the area of assessment region, effective
reservoir thickness, effective porosity, oil saturation, crude oil
density, well-controlled area, EUR, resource abundance and analogy coefﬁcient.

4. Potential and distribution of global tight oil resources
5.1. Hierarchical resource abundance analogy method
Global tight oil resources are characterized by wide distribution
and huge potential. It was predicted by International Energy
Agency (IEA) in 2012 that the global technically recoverable tight oil
resources amounted to 32.7  109 t (Fig. 3). As predicted by Energy
Information Administration (EIA) in 2013, the recoverable tight oil
resources reached 47.3  109 t. North America, Asia & Paciﬁc area,
and Central Asia-Russia are of the greatest potential, with recoverable resources of 11.0  109 t, 10.7  109 t and 10.4  109 t,
respectively. Central & South America, Africa and Europe are with
recovery resources of 8.2  109 t, 5.2  109 t and 1.8  109 t,
respectively. Both IEA and EIA predicted that the global tight oil
resources are of huge potential, especially in North America and
Asia & Paciﬁc area with large-scale development for tight oil. As
predicted by EIA, the global tight oil production will be up to
0.25  109 t in 2030; BP presented a more optimistic prediction that
the global tight oil production will be at least up to 0.45  109 t in

The resource abundance analogy method is one of the most
common methods in China's conventional oil and gas assessment
(Guo et al., 2011). This method is improved and more precise, its
principle is similar to the resource abundance analogy method of
the conventional oil and gas. This method takes the heterogeneity
of tight oil into account, and thus the whole assessment area is
divided into several small units for assessment based on the variation of geological conditions. In practical applications, this method
is great different with the resource abundance analogy method of
the conventional oil and gas.
Using the hierarchical resource abundance analogy method,
ﬁrstly we should evaluate geological conditions of the assessment
area, according to the geological conditions for the formation of
tight oil and the geological assessment results, the assessment area
can be divided into several geological units in three different levels,
that is, type A (core or sweet-spot units), type B (favorable or
extended units) and type C (prospective units). Then, the typical
calibration area with similar geological characteristics to the classiﬁed units is selected for the analogy assessment (Fig. 4). Finally,
the similarity coefﬁcient of each assessment units as well as both
geological and recoverable resources in different assessment unit
can be calculated. This method is more precise than the general
analogy method, and can show tight oil distribution in different
geological conditions, therefore, this method is convenient and
easy for application and favorable zone selection.
5.2. EUR analogy method

Fig. 3. Distribution of technical recoverable tight oil resources.

Through EUR analogy of the developing wells, the average
single-well of EUR can be obtained, and then the tight oil resources
would be calculated. Similar to the hierarchical resource abundance

6

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

Table 3
Assessment methods of tight oil resource in China.
Category

Method

Application scope

Advantages

Disadvantages

Analogy method

Analogy method

Low-exploration regions

The assessment is simple and
rapid

The heterogeneity of resource
distribution is not taken into
account, selection of analogy
standard and parameters has
strong subjectivity

Hierarchical resource
abundance analogy method

Moderate, high-exploration
regions

EUR analogy method

Moderate, high-exploration
regions

Heterogeneity of resource
distribution is taken into
account
EUR is directly calculated

Volumetric method

Low-exploration regions

The assessment is simple and
rapid.

Small-cell volumetric method

Moderate, high-exploration
regions

Spatial resources distribution of
prediction method

Moderate, high-exploration
regions

Heterogeneity of the
distribution of some key
parameters such as porosity is
taken into account
The spatial position
relationship among the
parameters is taken into
account, and the spatial
locations of resources are given

Numerical simulation of
hydrocarbon accumulation

Moderate, and lowexploration regions

Statistical method

Genetic method

analogy method, during application of the EUR analogy method,
the assessment area should be divided into three types, type A (core
unit or sweet-spot unit), type B (favorable unit or extended unit)
and type-C (prospective unit), and the area proportions of these
three types of units would be estimated. Then, a typical production
well is selected as the calibration unit of the single-well EUR
analogy. The single-well EUR curves of different types should be
plotted, then different analogy assessment parameters can be obtained. During the analogy assessment, one or more calibration
units with similar characteristics should be selected for type A, type
B and type C, respectively; then, the following key parameters are
determined: (1) the mean value, variance, maximum and minimum
of EUR obtained from statistical analysis of EURs of different types
of calibration units; (2) the average well-controlled area and recovery ratio (recovery coefﬁcient) of three types. Therefore, the
recoverable resources can be calculated through the analogy.
In order to ensure reliability of the analogy of some parameters
such as EUR, the controlled area per well and recovery coefﬁcient,
the production wells with similar geological conditions should be
selected when using EUR analogy method for tight oil assessment.
Guo et al. (2013a) described the analogy procedure and calculation
formulas of the EUR analogy method in detail.

5.3. Volumetric method
The volumetric method is commonly used in conventional oil
and gas assessment and can rapidly estimate the resources of the
studied area. Though the formation mechanism of tight oil is
different from the conventional oil and gas, the hydrocarbon
occurrence of tight oil is similar to conventional oil and gas. Thus,
the volumetric method also can be used to calculate tight oil
resources.
Tight oil resources can be rapidly and conveniently assessed
through a few parameters and data based on the formula of the

The geological distribution
characteristics and
accumulation rules of oil and
gas resources are systematically
understood

Due to short history of well
development, it is difﬁcult to
determine key parameters.
The heterogeneity of resource
distribution is not taken into
account

Multiple parameters and
distribution of the discovered
reserves are required, the
calculation process is complex
and the assessment period is
long
Some key parameters are easily
affected by sample collection
and test processes, basin
simulation is complex and the
assessment period is long

volumetric method and Monte Carlo algorithm, and the calculation
formula can be expressed as:

Qo ¼ 100,A,Ca ,Hfo ,4,ð1  Sw Þ,roi =Boi

(1)

where Qo denotes the resources (104t), A denotes the oil-bearing
area in the studied area (km2), Ca denotes the coefﬁcient of oilbearing area, Hfo denotes the effective thickness of oil-bearing
layer (m), ø denotes the effective porosity, Sw denotes the original
water saturation, roi denotes the crude oil density on ground (t/
m3); Boi denotes the crude oil volume factor.
In the calculation, the parameters can be input in the forms of
the mean values or the parameter distribution patterns such as the
uniform and triangular distributions; then the curve of cumulative
probability and the histogram of frequency are obtained through
several stochastic simulations. Then, the resources of different
probability distributions and the expected tight oil resources can be
calculated.

5.4. Small-cell volumetric method
Unlike the above-described volumetric method, in the smallcell volumetric method, the assessment area is divided into
several grid cells (or called surface element, see Fig. 5), that is the
calculation cell (or small cell). Based on the parameters of tight
reservoir such as effective reservoir thickness, effective porosity
and oil saturation in each grid cell, the resources in each grid cell
then can be calculated (Guo et al., 2011). This method is quite
different from the conventional volumetric method, because the
calculation results can be visually displayed in the form of resource
abundance, providing an important basis for favorable area optimization. The calculation procedure is described in detail below.
(1) The studied area is divided into several grids and the area of
each grid cell is determined. Generally, the studied area is

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

7

Fig. 5. Construction of grid units using the small-cell volumetric method.

The more detailed assessment procedures and calculation
formulas are described by Guo et al. (2013a).

5.5. Reservoir numerical simulation method

Fig. 4. Illustration of the hierarchical resource analogy method. (a) Resource abundance of the calibration unit. (b) Classiﬁcation of the assessment areas.

divided into several rectangular grids. In some cases, which
kind of grid (such as rectangular grid, PEBI grid, triangular
grid or the other variable-area grids) can be applied is
depended on the data source of the reservoir physical parameters. In general case, if the data are sourced from the
seismic data interpretation results, then the triangular grids
will be used; if the data are sourced from mud or well logging, PEBI grids will be used; if the data are sourced from the
comprehensive interpretation results (isoline data), then the
triangular or the other variable-area grids will be used.
(2) Parameters of effective porosity, effective thickness and oil
saturation of the small cell are calculated. If there are data
points in the small cell, the average values of each parameter
can be regarded as the parameter values of the small cell; if
there is no data point in the small cell, key parameter values
can be obtained through the grid interpolation software. At
last, the resources in each cell are calculated using the
calculation formula of the volumetric method, and thereby
the resources of the whole studied area can be calculated.

Tight oil has the complex hydrocarbon accumulation mechanism and thus no genetic assessment method for tight oil has yet
been established so far. The nanoscale testing technique is mainly
adopted for the physical simulation abroad, and coupled with
computed tomography (CT) scanning technology, the accumulation
process can be revealed (Loucks et al., 2009; Sondergeld et al.,
2010). The physical simulation experiments and numerical simulations started late in China. Currently, only three tight oil accumulation models of sandwich or interbed type, near-source type
and source-reservoir integration type, have been established (Guo
et al., 2013a), and the workable assessment module and technical
system are still under development. Moreover, the numerical
simulations should depend on the calculation results of basin
simulation.
Sandwich-or interbed type tight oil is quite typical. The reservoir is sandwiched in the source rock, i.e., a sandwich conﬁguration
is formed. The lithology of reservoirs generally is tight sandstone
and carbonate. The matrix porosity is smaller than 10% and the
matrix permeability under overburden pressure is less than 0.1 mD.
A typical example is the tight oil in Member 7 of the Yanchang
Formation of the Ordos Basin. The accumulation of such sourcereservoir interbed tight oil is near-source type with a short
migration distance. The crude oil that formed in and expulsed from
the source rocks directly migrate into the tight reservoir of the
source rock interlayer. The resources of this type of tight oil are
related to the hydrocarbon generation and expulsion intensity of
source rock as well as the thickness and porosity of the reservoir.
Near-source type tight oil, a kind of transition-type tight oil,
refers to the crude oil enriched in the tight reservoir adjacent to the
top or bottom of source rocks. The reservoir is dominated by
sandstones and carbonate, and the matrix porosity and permeability are slightly better than those of typical tight oil reservoir. The
typical examples are the tight oil in Member 6 of the Yanchang

8

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

Formation of the Ordos Basin and the Fuyu reservoir in the Songliao
Basin. The accumulation process of this type of tight oil is between
primary migration and secondary migration. Part of the crude oil
that expulsed from the source rocks will form the in-source tight oil
in the source rock interlayer while some will migrate into the
neighboring reservoirs. The accumulation quantity of tight oil is
associated with the amount of oil generation and expulsion from
the source rocks, the thickness and porosity of tight oil reservoir
and the geological time of densiﬁcation onset.
Source-reservoir integration type tight oil refers to tight oil in
reservoirs which are both hydrocarbon source rocks and reservoir.
For example, tight oil in the carbonate rocks such as limestone in
Shulu Depression, dolomitic limestone in Jimusaer Depression
(Kuang et al., 2013). Since the source rock and reservoir coexist, the
generated oil is accumulated in place. Shale oil also has a similar
accumulation process.
Currently, the numerical simulations on the accumulation
quantity of tight oil are primarily by means of basin simulations.
The key data in the calculation are mainly from results of basin
history simulation (such as geologic history, thermal history, hydrocarbon generation and expulsion history). For example, the
porosity evolution data is from results of burial history simulation,
the rock densiﬁcation data is from results of thermal history and
diagenetic evolution history simulation, and the data of oil saturation, oil generation and expulsion quantities are from results of
hydrocarbon generation and expulsion history simulation.
Overall, the hydrocarbon accumulation numerical simulation
method is a relatively precise method for tight oil assessment, and
only is applied to the region with abundant information and clear
understandings of petroleum accumulation history. More details of
this method are described in Guo et al. (2013b).
6. A case study of Da'anzhai member
In this study, we focused on Jurassic Da'anzhai Member of
Ziliujing Formation in the central Sichuan area of the Sichuan Basin
for tight oil assessment.
The source rocks of the Da'anzhai Member are the shallow to
semi-deep lacustrine dark mudstones, mainly are distributed in the
3rd sub-member and the lower part of the 1st sub-member of
Da'anzhai Member. The thickness of source rocks ranges from 20 to
70 m and the effective source rocks which the thickness is over 5 m
cover an area of approximately 72  103 km2. The organic matter
types are primarily humus-sapropel type, the total organic carbon
(TOC) ranges from 0.62% to 2.56% (average 0.99%). The potential of
hydrocarbon generation mostly ranges from 2 to 6 mg/g, with a
mean value of 4 mg/g. The hydrogen index is from 60 to 210 mg/
g∙TOC, with a mean value of 150 mg/g∙TOC, indicating a good oil
source rock. The values of Ro in the most parts of the Da'anzhai
Member are from 0.83% to 1.4%, indicating the source rocks are
mature on the whole and at the oil generation peak. The values of
Ro in the area in the north of Longgang and the west of Chengdu are
over 1.3%, indicating the source rocks are in the stage of gas
generation.
The reservoirs in the Da'anzhai Member are mainly developed in
the 1st sub-member and the 3rd sub-member, and the litology are
shell limestone, argillaceous shell limestone, shell banded limestone and crystalline limestone. The pure shell limestone is the
primary productive horizon. The shell limestones are distributed
stably in the whole central Sichuan, characterized by thin interbeds
and locally medium-thick beds; the thickness per layer is generally
2e10 m and the cumulative thickness is 20e40 m. Analysis of 2437
samples from 38 cored wells in 11 blocks indicates that the shell
limestone and argillaceous shell limestone are characterized by
extremely low porosity and permeability, the porosity is less than

1% and the permeability is less than 0.1 mD; the porosity ranges
from 0.17% to 5.94%, with the average value of 0.99%, and the
permeability ranges from 0.0000559 to 506 mD, with the average
value of 1.09 mD.
In terms of source-reservoir conﬁguration relationship, the
reservoirs in the Da'anzhai Member can be divided into the
following three types. (1) Limestone-shale contact type, the shell
limestones on the top of the 1st sub-member and on the bottom of
the 3rd sub-member are contacted with the mudstone and shale.
Thickness per layer of these two suites of shell limestone mostly is
over 4 m. Under the same tectonic stress, the fractures are easily
formed. Currently, the oil and gas in the Da'anzhai Member are
mainly produced from this type of reservoir. (2) Thin limestoneshale interbedded type. The reservoir sandwiched with the
source rock, is favorable for the hydrocarbon generation and
accumulation, therefore, oil and gas can be observed everywhere in
the Da'anzhai Member. (3) Thick-bedded mudstone type. The
mudstones are well developed in the middle part of the 3rd submember, characterized by great hydrocarbon generation potential
and poor reservoir development.
In this study, the tight oil resource of the Da'anzhai Member is
assessed using the hierarchical resource abundance analogy
method, EUR analogy method and small-cell volumetric method,
respectively.
6.1. Hierarchical resource abundance analogy method
For the sake of comparison of results from different methods,
the assessment area was divided into three types (type A, type B
and type C) according to high-grade, middle-grade, low-grade
resource abundances, respectively. Type A block is dominated by
shelly limestone with the thickness of over 25 m, and thick source
rocks and fractures covering an area of approximately
3.35  103 km2. In the type B block, thickness of the reservoir and
the source rocks are 10e25 m, 15e30 m, respectively, and fractures
are well developed with an area of approximately 6.65  103 km2.
In type C block, the reservoir is tight and covers an area of
approximately 14.15  103 km2. The area of type A, type B and type
C block occupy 13.87%, 27.54% and 58.59% of the total assessment
area respectively.
In the practical application, ﬁrstly the analogy calibration unit
should be established, and the resource abundance should be acquired. The Gongshanmiao oilﬁeld, with a high exploration degree,
was selected as the calibration unit in this study for tight oil
assessment in the Da'anzhai Member. This calibration unit is
located in the region 6 km south of Nanbu County, Nanchong City,
Sichuan Province, with an area of approximately 627.5 km2. By the
end of 2012, the proved geological oil reserves of the Gongshanmiao oilﬁeld is 16.1268  106 t, where totally 104 wells were
drilled and 70 wells were obtained the commercial oil ﬂows. The
resource abundances of the calibration unit were calculated using
the volumetric method and the single-well production descending
ﬁtting method. According to the calculation results, type A block
has the high abundance of over 120  103 t/km2, type B block has
the medium abundance ranging from 50  103 t/km2 to 120  103 t/
km2, and type C block has the small abundance less than 50  103 t/
km2.
Based on the statistics of the distributions of total 10 geological
parameters in these three types of blocks, the geologic parameters
of these blocks were calculated. Then, according to the analogy
standard, the analogy assessment was conducted using the abovedescribed the hierarchical resource abundance analogy method
and the tight oil assessment software. Results reveal that the
geological reserves with a probability of 50% are approximately
1.285  109 t.

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

6.2. Small-cell volumetric method
Parameters of the small-cell volumetric method include effective reservoir thickness, fullness coefﬁcient of trap space, porosity
and oil saturation. The effective reservoir thickness refers to the
cumulative thickness of the limestone with oil-producing capacity.
The fullness coefﬁcient of trap space is closely related to the supply
of oil source, i.e., it is directly related with the thickness, TOC and Ro
of source rocks. The porosity data is from the test data and logging
interpretation results of the drilled wells. The oil saturation data is
from oil testing data and logging interpretation results of drilled
wells. The crude oil volume factor generally is 1.15.
When using the small-cell volumetric method to calculate
geological resources, because both the reservoir thickness and hydrocarbon distribution area are known, therefore, the oil saturation
and fullness coefﬁcient in the small cells impose greatest effects on
the results. In the calculation, thickness of the shell limestone is the
reservoir thickness, the porosity is the measured porosity, and
determination of the oil saturation is based on the analogy with the
known oil saturation. Then, after determination of key parameters
(effective reservoir thickness and distribution, porosity distribution, and oil saturation distribution), for the small-cell method,
through the small-cell assessment software, the quantity of
resource and the resource abundance can be calculated by division
of the study area into small cells, interpolate attribute data and

9

resource calculation of the volumetric method. Fig. 6 shows distributions of key parameters of the Da'anzhai Member.
The calculation result reveals the geological resource abundance
of the tight oil in the Da'anzhai Member primarily ranges from
50  103 t/km2 to 130  103 t/km2 and the total geological resources
are 1.114  109 t. The area with the geological resource abundance
over 10  103 t/km2 is approximately 25  103 km2, the geological
resource is about 1.038  109 t and mainly is distributed in the
central and eastern Sichuan (Fig. 7).

6.3. EUR analogy method
Like the hierarchical resource abundance method, the EUR
analogy method is used to calculate resources by constructing a
EUR calibration region ﬁrstly, followed by the analogy assessment.
In this study, by analyzing the EUR per well of the Da'anzhai oil
ﬁeld, we plotted the EUR distribution curves for three types of
wells, and acquired their key parameters, i.e., type I of the EUR per
well equal to or great than 15  103 t, type II of the EUR per well
from 5  103 t to 15  103 t, type III of the EUR per well small than
5  103 t. Through analogy with EURs of typical wells in the Elm
Coulee Formation of the Williston Basin and the Pingdiquan Formation of the Junngar Basin (Guo et al., 2013b), the key parameters
in the assessment area were determined (Table 4). Finally, the
recoverable resources in type A, type B and type C blocks with a

Fig. 6. Distribution of the key calculation parameters of the Da'anzhai Member by the small-cell volumetric method.

10

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

Fig. 7. Distribution of the resource abundance (>10  104 t/km2) of tight oil of the Da'anzhai Member by the small-cell volumetric method.

Table 4
Tight oil resources of the Jurassic Da'anzhai Member in Sichuan Basin by the EUR
analogy method.
Parameter

Type A block

Type B block

Type C block

Area/km2
Controlled area per well/km2
EUR/103 t
Recoverable resources/103 t

3350
1.45
23
53 170

6650
0.9
6
44 330

14 150
0.45
1
31 460

probability of 50% were calculated, the total recoverable resources
in the Da'anzhai Member were approximately 0.129  109 t
(Table 4).
Through the values of resources and the recovery coefﬁcient by
three different methods, the geological resources of tight oil and
the recoverable resources in the Jurassic Da'anzhai Member are
approximately (1.038-1.650)  109 t and approximately (0.0810.129)  109 t, respectively. The geological and recoverable resources of the regions with a probability of 50% are 1.333  109 t
and 0.106  109 t, respectively (Table 5).
7. Potential tight oil resources and enrichment characteristics
Through the above-described assessment methods, a preliminary assessment was carried out on tight oil resources in some
major basins and regions explored by PetroChina. The assessment

result reveals that tight oil reserves in eight major onshore basins in
China are about 20  109 t, suggesting that China has a solid
resource basis for large-scale development. In particular, the Ordos
Basin, the Songliao Basin, the Junggar Basin, the Bohai Bay Basin
and the Sichuan Basin have 89% of the total tight oil resources in
China, and are thus regarded as the most practical tight oil exploration regions in China.
Since researches on tight oil in China is still in the early stage,
except that Member 7 of the Yanchang Formation in the Ordos
Basin, the Jurassic strata in Central Sichuan, Fuyu reservoir in the
Songliao Basin, the Lucaogou Formation of Jimsar Depression in the
Junggar Basin, Shulu Sag in the Bohai Bay Basin, and Anan
Depression in the Erlian Basin have more tight oil data, other
exploration areas in China are of less data. Therefore, tight oil resources currently are estimated on the base of the available data,
and the further precise assessments still need more data.
In terms of the enrichment characteristics, China's tight oil is
mainly distributed in the basin centers and slope areas, i.e., deepwater regions in lake basins, and shows the large area of continuous distribution. In the tight-oil enrichment regions, the source
rocks are well developed and the reservoirs are mostly thinbedded. Moreover, source rocks and tight reservoirs overlay with
each other and mostly form “sandwich” pattern. Since the tight oil
reservoirs are quite tight and are of quite low permeability, high-

Table 5
Summary of tight oil resources of the Jurassic Da'anzhai Member in Sichuan Basin.
Resource abundance analogy method

Small-cell volumetric method

EUR analogy method

Total resource with a probability of
50%/

Geological
resource/109 t

Recovery
coefﬁcient/%

Recoverable
resource/109 t

Geological
resource/109 t

Recoverable
resource/109 t

Geological
resource/109 t

Recoverable
resource/109 t

Geological
resource/109 t

Recoverabl
resource/109 t

1.285

7.8e9.5

0.1e0.122

1.038

0.081e0.099

1.36e1.65

0.129

1.33

0.106

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

quality source rocks and great hydrocarbon-expulsion intensity are
necessary for the accumulation of tight oil.
The enrichment of tight oil is closely related with the genetic
type of source rock and the reservoir. According to the research
results, tight oil is mainly distributed in the sands of submerged
delta in deep water, gravity ﬂow sandstone and lacustrine carbonate rock. Tight oil reservoirs in deep and semi-deep lacustrine
submerged delta sandstone are most widely distributed in the
Qingshankou and the Quantou Formations of the Songliao Basin,
the Shahejie Formation of the Bohai Bay Basin, the Yanchang Formation of the Ordos Basin, and the Middle-Lower Jurassic of the
Sichuan Basin. For example, in the Songliao Basin, tight oil is
vertically distributed in the tight sandstones of the Quantou Formation (Fuyu reservoir) and the ﬁrst and second members of the
Qingshankou Formation (Gaotaizi reservoir), and a number of thinbedded sand bodies with a burial depth less than 2000 m overlay
with each other vertically; horizontally, tight oil reservoirs are
dominated by submerged delta front facies, mainly distributed in
Changyuan of Daqing, Qijia-Gulong and Sanzhao areas in the
northern Songliao Basin, and Da'anbei, Gaojia, Chaganpao, Rangzijing and Daqingzijing areas in the southern Songliao Basin.
Tight oil in deep lacustrine gravity ﬂow sandstones is mainly
distributed in the Yanchang Formation of the Ordos Basin and the
Shahejie Formation of the Bohai Bay Basin. For example, tight oil in
Member 7 of the Upper Triassic Yanchang Formation is featured by
large reservoir size, thin sand layer with wide distribution. Vertically, the tight sandstone oil reservoirs are mostly developed in 1
and 2 oil layer group of Member 7 of the Yanchang Formation.
Horizontally, tight oil is distributed in the submerged delta front
near the hydrocarbon generation center and in the favorable sands
of the gravity ﬂow in the central lake basin. The tight sandstone oil
reservoirs in Member 7 of the Yanchang Formation are mainly
distributed in the delta front sands in Jiayuan area and the turbidite
sands in the eastern Longdong area.
The tight oil in lacustrine carbonate rocks are mainly developed
in depressions and slopes. This kind of reservoir is sandwiched in
the semi-deep and deep lacustrine dark muddy shales with moderate burial depths (3500 m). The of tight oil is distributed in
Permian of the Junggar Basin and the Santanghu Basin, Paleogene
of the Qaidam Basin and the Bohai Bay Basin. For example, the
upper and lower suites of sweet-spot bodies are vertically developed in the Middle Permian Lucaogou Formation of Jimusar
Depression in the Junggar Basin, in which the upper sweet-spot
body consists of carbonate shoal and bar deposits, and the lower
sweet-spot body consists of the distal deltaic bar deposits and the
sheet dolomitic siltstone-ﬁne sandstone. Both these sweet-spot
bodies are distributed horizontally in the effective source rocks
(Kuang et al., 2013; Jiang et al., 2014).
In conclusion, the enrichment of tight oil is controlled by many
factors. Large areas of high-quality source rocks and tight reservoirs
are the foundation for the continuous distribution of tight oil in a
large area. A close contact between source rock and reservoir is a
primary controlling factor of tight oil formation.
8. Conclusions
(1) Based on the accumulation characteristics of continental
tight oil in China, three kinds of the assessment methods,
namely, the analogy method, the statistical method and the
genetic method, and their related assessment parameter
systems were preliminarily established. More speciﬁcally,
the small-cell volumetric method, the EUR analogy method
and the hierarchical resource abundance analogy method are
suitable for the calculation of resources in the highexploration regions, while the volumetric method and the

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

11

analogy method are appropriate for the estimation of resources in the low-exploration regions.
The newly established hierarchical resource abundance
method, the EUR analogy method and the small-cell volumetric method were applied to assess tight oil in the Sichuan,
Ordos, Songliao, Junggar, Bohai Bay and the other tight oil
basins in China. Results reveal that China has a great tight oil
potential, and the total tight oil resource in eight major basins is up to 20  109 t, indicating that these basins have great
potential for large-scale development. In particular, Member
7 in the Ordos Basin, the Lucaogou Formation in the Junggar
Basin, the Shahejie Formation in the Bohai Bay Basin, the
Qingshankou Formation and Fuyu reservoir in the Songliao
Basin, have huge tight oil potential and are the most practical
and perspective for tight oil exploration.
For the analogy methods, the key of the hierarchical resource
abundance analogy method is the selection of suitable calibration units and the determination of analogy parameters,
while the key of the EUR analogy method is the selection of
typical production well and the determination of the controlling area per well. For the statistical methods, the core of
small-cell volumetric method is the determination of reserves per unit volume in each cell, while the core of the
volumetric method is to accurately and reasonably set values
of the calculation parameters. The accuracy of the assessment result depends on the geological understandings of the
studied area and the values of geological parameters.
For the genetic method, the hydrocarbon generation,
expulsion and accumulation quantities of source rocks
should be acquired through the simulation of the basin.
However, tight oil has a complex accumulation mechanism
and a well-accepted genetic method for tight oil assessment
has yet not formed.
Each tight oil assessment method has its own application
scope and advantages/disadvantages. In the practical application, multiple methods should be purposefully selected
depending on the petroleum geological conditions, tight oil
accumulation mechanism and the exploration and exploitation degree of the studied area, so as to estimate resources
from various different perspectives and to cross-validate
results, thereby improving the credibility of the estimated
results.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by Major Scientiﬁc and Technological
Project of PetroChina (Grant No.2014E-050202).

References
Charpentier, R.R., Cook, T.A., 2010. USGS Methodology for Assessing Continuous
Petroleum Resources. U.S. Geological Survey, Virginia.
Chen, Z.H., Osadetz, K.G., Gao, H.Y., Hannigan, P.K., 2004. SuperSD: an object-based
stochastic simulation program for modeling the locations of undiscovered petroleum accumulations. Comput. Geosci. 30 (3), 281e290.
Chen, Z.H., Osadetz, K.G., Gao, H.Y., 2005. Stochastic simulation of undiscovered
petroleum accumulation. In: Leuangthong, O., Deutsch, C.V. (Eds.), Quantitative
Geology and Geostatistics. Springer, Deutsch, pp. 661e670.
Chen, Z.H., Osadetz, K.G., 2013. An assessment of tight oil resource potential in the
upper cretaceous Cardium Formation, western Canada sedimentary basin.
Petrol. Explor. Dev. 40 (3), 320e328 (in Chinese).
Chen, Z.H., Osadetz, K.G., 2006a. Geological risk mapping and prospect evaluation
using multivariate and Bayesian methods, Western Sverdrup Basin of Canada.
AAPG Bull. 90 (6), 859e872.
Chen, Z.H., Osadetz, K.G., 2006b. Undiscovered petroleum accumulation mapping
using model-based stochastic simulation. Math. Geol. 38 (1), 1e16.
Cheng, K., Wu, W., Holditch, S.A., Ayers, W.B., Mcvay, D.A., 2010. In: Assessment of
the Distribution of Technically-recoverable Resource in North American Basins:

12

S. Wang et al. / Petroleum Research 2 (2017) 1e12

Canadian Unconventional Resources & International Petroleum Conference,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada, 2010. Calgary. Society of Petroleum Engineers.
Clarkson, C.R., Pedersen, P.K., 2011. Production Analysis of Western Canadian Unconventional Light Oil Plays. Society of Petroleum Engineers, Calgary.
Dashtgard, S.E., Buschkuehle, M.B.E., Fairgrieve, B., Berhane, H., 2008. Geological
characterization and potential for carbon dioxide (CO2) enhanced oil recovery
in the Eardium Formation, central Pembina ﬁeld, Alberta. Bull. Can. Petrol. Geol.
56 (2), 147e164.
Gautier, D.L., 1995. National Assessment of United States Oil and Gas Resources:
Results, Methodology, and Supposing Data. U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.
Guo, Q.L., Chen, N.S., Song, H.Q., Wu, X.Z., Xie, H.B., 2013b. Accumulation models
and numerical models of tight oil: a case study from Yanchang Formation in
Ordos Basin. Lithol. Reserv. 25 (1), 4e10 (in Chinese).
Guo, Q.L., Chen, N.S., Wu, X.Z., Song, H.Q., Yang, Z., Li, D.H., 2013a. Method for
assessment of tight oil resources. China Pet. Explor. 18 (2), 67e76 (in Chinese).
Guo, Q.L., Zhou, C.Q., Chen, N.S., Hu, J.W., Xie, H.B., 2011. Evaluation methods for
unconventional hydrocarbon resources. Lithol. Reserv. 23 (4), 12e19 (in
Chinese).
Jia, C.Z., Zou, C.N., Li, J.Z., Li, D.H., Zheng, M., 2012. Assessment criteria, main types,
basic features and resource prospects of the tight oil in China. Acta Pet. Sin. 33
(3), 343e350 (in Chinese).
Jia, C.Z., 2012. Several important issues about current oil and gas exploration in
China. Acta Pet. Sin. 33 (S1), 6e13 (in Chinese).
Jiang, Z.X., Zhang, W.Z., Liang, C., Wang, Y.S., Liu, H.M., Chen, X., 2014. Characteristics
and evaluation elements of shale oil reservoir. Acta Pet. Sin. 35 (1), 184e196 (in
Chinese).
Kenneth, C.H., Kurt, J.S., Don, A.Y., 2013. Continuous Resources Assessment Integrating Volumetric Analysis and Probabilistic Well Simulation. International
Petroleum Technology Conference, Beijing.
Kuang, L.C., Hu, W.X., Wang, X.L., Wu, H.G., Wang, X.L., 2013. Research of the tight oil
reservoir in the Lucaogou Formation in Jimusar sag: analysis of lithology and
porosity characteristic. Geol. J. China Univ. 19 (3), 529e553 (in Chinese).
Liang, D.G., Ran, L.H., Dai, D.S., He, Z.X., Ou, Y.J., Liao, Q.S., He, W.Y., 2011. A rerecognition of the prospecting potential of Jurassic large-area and nonconventional oils in the central-northern Sichuan Basin. Acta Pet. Sin. 32 (1),
8e17 (in Chinese).
Liu, Y.X., Chen, Z.H., Osadetz, K.G., 2010. Bayesian support vector machine for petroleum resource assessment, example from western Sverdrup Basin, Canada.
In: Third Symposium on Resource Assessment Methodologies Program & Abstracts, Canmore, pp. 66e69.

Loucks, R.G., Reed, R.M., Ruppel, S.C., Jarvie, D.M., 2009. Morphology, genesis, and
distribution of nanometer-scale pores in siliceous mudstones of the Mississippian Barnett shale. J. Sediment. Res. 79, 848e861.
Olea, R.A., Cook, T.A., Coleman, J.L., 2010. A methodology for the assessment of
unconventional (continuous) resources with an application to the greater
natural Buttes gas ﬁeld, Utah. Nat. Resour. Res. 19 (4), 10e18.
Pang, Z.L., Zou, C.N., Tao, S.Z., Yang, Z., Wu, S.T., 2012. Formation, distribution and
resource evaluation of tight oil in China. Chin. Eng. Sci. 14 (7), 60e67 (in
Chinese).
Schmoker, J.W., 1999. Geological Survey Assessment Model for Continuous (Unconventional) Oil and Gas Accumulations-The ”FORSPAN” Model. U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.
Schmoker, J.W., 2002. Resource-assessment perspectives for unconventional gas
systems. AAPG Bull. 86 (11), 1993e1999.
Schmoker, J.W., 2005. U. S. Geological Survey Assessment Concepts for Continuous
Petroleum Accumulations. U.S. Geological Survey, Denver.
Sondergeld, C.H., Ambrose, R.J., Rai, C.S., Moncrieff, J., 2010. Microstructural Studies
of Gas Shales. Society of Petroleum Engineers, Pittsburgh.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), 2012. Annual Energy Outlook 2012
with Projections to 2035. EIA, Washington.
Wang, S.Q., Hu, S.Y., Dong, D.Z., 2012. Jurassic System in the east of Sichuan province: a tight oil and gas new ﬁeld of great importance in Sichuan Basin. Nat. Gas.
Ind. 32 (12), 22e29 (in Chinese).
Xie, H.B., Guo, Q.L., Li, F., Li, J.Z., Wu, N., Hu, S.Y., Liang, K., 2011. Prediction of petroleum exploration risk and subterranean spatial distribution of hydrocarbon
accumulations. Petrol. Sci. 8, 17e23.
Yang, H., Li, S.X., Liu, X.Y., 2013. Characteristics and resource prospects of tight oil
and shale oil in Ordos Basin. Acta Pet. Sin. 34 (1), 1e11 (in Chinese).
Zhao, W.Z., Du, J.H., 2012. Tight Oil and Gas. Petroleum Industry Press, Beijing,
pp. 1e142 (in Chinese).
Zou, C.N., Tao, S.Z., Yang, Z., Yuan, X.J., Zhu, R.K., Hou, L.H., Jia, J.H., Wang, L., Wu, S.T.,
Bai, B., Gao, X.H., Yang, C., 2012a. New advance in unconventional petroleum
exploration and research in China. Bulletin of Mineralogy. Petrol. Geochem. 31
(4), 312e322 (in Chinese).
Zou, C.N., Zhu, R.K., Wu, S.T., Yang, Z., Tao, S.Z., Yuan, X.J., Hou, L.H., Yang, H., Xu, C.C.,
Li, D.H., Bai, B., Wang, L., 2012b. Types, characteristics, genesis and prospects of
conventional and unconventional hydrocarbon accumulations: taking tight oil
and tight gas in China as an instance. Acta Pet. Sin. 33 (2), 173e187 (in Chinese).

