Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

Connotation analysis, source-reservoir assemblage
types and development potential of unconventional
hydrocarbons in China
Jianzhong Li*, Min Zhen, Xiaoming Chen, Denghua Li, Shaoyong Wang and Tao Song
PetroChina Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration and Development, Beijing 100083, China
Received June 10, 2016; Accepted September 28, 2016

Abstract: Through analysis of the connotation of unconventional hydrocarbons, the source-reservoir
assemblages of unconventional hydrocarbons are divided into three types, i.e., source-reservoir
neighboring type, source-reservoir integration type, and source-reservoir separation type. The
source-reservoir neighboring type resources mainly include tight oil and tight gas with the following
formation conditions and characteristics: (1) efficient near-source accumulation close to high-quality
source rocks with the pressure difference between source and reservoir as the dynamic force; (2)
large-area tight reservoirs with certain porosity, dominated by micro-nanopores of inorganic origin; (3)
distributed in depressions and slopes with large hydrocarbon-bearing area and great resource quantity,
low abundance and local development of “sweet spots”; (4) weak tectonism. The source-reservoir
integration type resources mainly include coalbed methane, shale gas, shale oil and oil shale. The
formation conditions and characteristics are: (1) high abundance of organic matter, different types
of organic matter and thermal evolution grades leading to formation of different resources types;
(2) organic-rich sections are distributed continuously in the reservoiring space which is dominated
by nanometer organic pores, interparticle pores and microfissures; (3) hydrocarbons mainly occur
in free or adsorbed state, varying much with resource type; (4) the resources are self-conserved,
and enriched in depressions and slopes, the conservation conditions are controlled by tectonics,
temperature and pressure; (5) the production per well can be enhanced by volume fracturing, which
increases the permeability of the reservoirs. The source-reservoir separation type resources are
more special, mainly including (1) transformed conventional resources such as oil sand and heavy
oil; (2) unsteady resources formed under special conditions of temperature and pressure, among
which natural gas hydrate is a representative. These three types of resources in China are different in
both development prospect and current situation: (1) the source-reservoir neighboring type is most
practical and will develop fast in the next 5 years; (2) the source-reservoir integration type needs
continuous exploration and technical breakthrough, and is expected to develop rapidly in the coming
decade; (3) in the source-reservoir separation type resources, natural gas hydrates have the greatest
development potential, on which technical tests are being conducted.

Key words: Unconventional hydrocarbons; connotation; source-reservoir
assemblage; source-reservoir neighboring type; source-reservoir integration
type; source-reservoir separation type; development potential

* Corresponding author. Email: lijizh@petrochina.com.cn

© 2017 Chinese Petroleum Society. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
135

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

1 Introduction
At present, “unconventional hydrocarbons” have become the
buzzword of the oil and gas industry and even the energy sector
in China. The huge success that the United States has achieved
in unconventional oil and gas sets an excellent example for
China to replicate. In 2013, the production of unconventional
natural gas and tight oil in the U.S. reached 500.8×109 m3 and
0.14×109 t, respectively, dramatically decreasing its dependency
on foreign oil and gas. On the contrary, the supply and demand
gap of oil and gas in China is increasing. In 2013, the foreign
dependency of oil and gas reached 59% and 28%, respectively.
Undoubtedly, the large-scale development of unconventional
hydrocarbons in China would be of great strategic significance
to improve the energy-demand situation. However, there
have long been controversies on the prospect of China’s
unconventional hydrocarbons, as following.
(1) The evaluation results of unconventional resource potential
in China are greatly different, some of which are excessively
optimistic while many experts are skeptical, because firstly,
the unconventional resources in China are very special due to
the multiphase tectonic movements, the high-evolution marine
sequences, and the continental sediments of great lateral variation
and strong heterogeneity; secondly, knowledge and exploration
of unconventional hydrocarbon resources are generally limited;
thirdly, evaluation methods and standards are not unified, many
evaluation results are actually estimates.
(2) There are different opinions about the stage of China’s
current hydrocarbon exploration. Some people hold the view that
conventional oil and gas resources still have great exploration
potential, especially for the less well explored natural gas, which
are still the focus of future exploration; others think that China
has been ushered into a full-scale development of unconventional
hydrocarbons because the exploration degree of some basins is so
high that there is faint possibility to find big conventional oil and
gas fields; the third notion holds that China has already entered
a stage where conventional and unconventional hydrocarbons go
hand in hand. Many hydrocarbon reservoirs with low or ultralow permeability discovered in the past are actually tight oil
and gas resources, which have taken up considerable proportion
in the reserves and production of China’s oil and gas. Hence,
unconventional resources alone cannot bring massive increase to
the oil and gas production.
(3) T h e d evelo p m e nt fo cu s a n d p r o sp e c t of C h i n a’s
unconventional hydrocarbon are not unified, especially the
development prospect of shale gas and coalbed methane are
much debated, which is objectively detrimental to the long- and
medium-term planning and strategic decisions.
(4) Perceptions a re different about the ter m inology of
unconventional hydrocarbon, such as tight oil, shale gas, etc.

136

One of the important reasons behind the above controversies is
that the understanding of “unconventional” is not unified, either
biased or broad. Therefore, it is necessary to decompose the
conception of “unconventional” and understand its geological
characteristics and distribution pattern from the point of genesis.
According to the results of related researches in recent years, we
expound on the understanding of unconventional hydrocarbons
and classify source-reservoir assemblages of unconventional
resources. Then on this basis, we discuss the formation conditions,
geological characteristics and the resources potential, and predict
the prospect of future development, in a bid to help the long-term
development of China’s unconventional oil and gas.

2 The connotation analysis of some important
terms of unconventional hydrocarbon
2.1 The whole-process simulation of the hydrocarbon
destination
After being discharged from the source rocks, the hydrocarbons
need to undergo a certain distance of migration before the
oil and gas can be trapped (Zhang et al., 1999). However,
as a complex dynamic process in geological history, the
hydrocarbon migration and accumulation is hard to observe
directly (Luo et al., 2012). Fortunately through indirect means,
such as geochemical tracing, fluid dynamics, displacement
simulation experiment and numerical simulation of migration
and accumulation, it is feasible to qualitatively determine the
favorable migration path and the accumulation zone, and then
enable a tracking-down comprehensive evaluation from the
source rocks to traps, so as to guide oil and gas exploration (Zhao
et al., 2002). In recent years, breakthroughs in both tight oil
and gas and shale oil and gas reservoirs have further enriched
and developed the knowledge of oil and gas resources from
generation to accumulation (Jia et al, 2014; Zou et al., 2014).
In summary, there are five destinations for the hydrocarbons
after being generated in source rocks (Fig. 1): (1) once being
discharged, oil and gas migrated along effective migration
pathways and accumulated in various traps. Oil, gas, and water
can be differentiated under the effect of buoyancy, resulting in the
conventional oil and gas resources in traditional sense; (2) there
was no migration after generation, oil and gas accumulate near
the source rocks with low enrichment degree but large area and
scale, resulting in the so-called continuous accumulation; (3) after
generation, some of the hydrocarbons were not expulsed but retained
in the source rocks, such as coalbed methane, shale gas, oil shale,
i.e., the residual oil and gas in source rocks; (4) the formed reservoirs
underwent physical and chemical processes, causing changes in
the original occurrence and fluid properties, such as heavy oil,
oil sands, oil cracking gas, namely transformed oil and gas; (5)
oil and gas dissipated during migration or the formed reservoir
was thoroughly destructed, resulting in ineffective resources.

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

Sea level

Top of oil
generation
window
Top of gas
generation
window

Conventional
hydrocarbon

Source-reservoir integration type

Conventional Conventional
oil
gas

Fig. 1

Shale oil

Shale gas Coalbed methane

Normal
fault

Reverse Unconformity
fault

Source-reservoir neighboring type
Tight oil

Tight sandstone gas

Source-reservoir separation type
Natural gas hydrate Heavy oil/oil sands

Types of source-reservoir assemblage and the distribution patterns of hydrocarbon resources

2.2 Conventional and unconventional hydrocarbon
Conventional hydrocarbon resources in a traditional sense
mainly refer to the first destination mentioned above, which
have generally experienced obvious migration. Conventional
resou rces have h igh deg re e of en r ich ment due to t he
accumulation effect of the trap, and can be economically
exploited with conventional techniques. Of course, if conditions
for forming reservoirs and traps near the source rocks are
favorable, conventional oil and gas resources can also come into
being. Currently, unconventional hydrocarbons generally refers
to all the oil and gas resources which cannot be economically
exploited by conventional techniques under existing economic
and technological conditions, mainly including tight gas,
coalbed methane, shale gas, tight oil, oil shale, oil sand, and
natural gas hydrate, etc. However, from the point of genesis,
unconventional hydrocarbons mainly refer to the second and
third destinations which mentioned above, and have generally
five common characteristics.
(1) There is a paucity of migration or significant migration. The
source rock is close to or integrated with the reservoir; (2) all
reservoirs are very tight and used to be deemed as ineffective
reservoirs, for instance, mudstone-shale has long been seen as
impermeable zone; (3) large area of continuous accumulation
is a basic characteristic, with large scope and quantity of
hydrocarbon resource; (4) only by taking measures including
massive fracturing, can a commercial production be achievable,
primarily because reservoir permeability is very poor, the
hydrocarbons cannot flow to the well bore depending on
formation pressure (Wu et al., 2014); (5) exploration cost is high,
so an effective resource necessitates three basic conditions: the
production per well can be greatly improved, the overall cost
can be reduced after mass production, and the prices of oil and
gas maintain reasonably high. Of course, there are exceptions,
for example, although the reservoir conditions of oil sands are
generally good, conventional exploration techniques cannot be
adopted because the fluid property of oil sands is different from

that of conventional resources. The physical reservoir conditions
are also quite favorable for natural gas hydrate (NGH), but the
conditions for reservoir formation are very special. Therefore,
oil sands and NGH are special types of unconventional
hydrocarbons.
In conclusion, the differences between conventional and
unconventional hydrocarbon resources are seemingly caused by
technical and economic conditions but actually determined by
different formation conditions and genetic mechanisms.

2.3 Shale gas and tight gas
Overseas, shale gas is defined as natural gas occurring in organicrich shale formation (Curtis, 2002; EIA, 2014). In October
2013, China National Energy Administration (NEA) issued the
National Shale Gas Industry Polices, pointing out that “shale gas
refers to the unconventional natural gas occurring in organicrich shales and their interlayer mainly in the adsorbed or free
state” (NEA, 2013). At present, there are still disputes on whether
the natural gas in the shale interlayer can be regarded as shale
gas, especially when considering the thickness of the interlayer.
There is a general consensus that tight gas mainly refers to tight
sandstone gas, the natural gas accumulating in the high-quality
tight sandstone neighboring or sandwiched in high-quality source
rock without large-scale and long-distance migration, and the
underground permeability generally lower than 0.1 mD (SCPGE,
2011; Li et al., 2012). In fact, the natural gas resources found in
other tight reservoirs which are close to the source rocks, such as
volcanic rocks, should also be regarded as tight gas.
The understanding of shale gas should not deviate from our
original intention to find natural gas in the source rocks since shale
gas is the most popular unconventional hydrocarbon resources
at present. If the connotation of shale gas is expanded, especially
when defining all of the natural gas in the interlayers as shale gas,
it is easy to confuse it with tight gas. This would thus obscure the
boundary between minerals and shale gas management even more
difficult. Through analyzing the commercially developed shale

137

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

gas area in North America and China, we concluded that there are
generally four essential conditions for discovering shale gas with
large-scale development potential.
(1) Abundance of organic matter is high. The TOC is generally
more than 2% or 3%. In other words, the high-quality source
rocks are the premise of shale gas generation. (2) Fine-grained
sediments are predominant. In general, the particle size is
less than 0.0039 mm, although the rocks can be composed of
fine grained clastic rock, clay, organic matter and many other
constituents. (3) Enrichment sections with high content of
organic matter are present, which are usually greater than 2030 m. Besides, the thin sand layers or isolated sand lenticular
bodies within those sections are not large. (4) The reservoirs are
mainly distributed in synclines and slopes and normally have
overpressure and good conservation conditions. In China, besides
shale gas of marine facies, there are shale gas of continental and
transitional facies, and the shale sedimentary characteristics and
resource endowment vary dramatically. Therefore, evaluation
criteria need to be separately established on the basis of
exploration practice.

2.4 Tight oil, shale oil and oil shale
After a prolonged discussion, there is a general consensus on
the connotation of tight oil and shale oil. Tight oil refers to the
oil accumulating in tight clastic or carbonate reservoirs that
are close to or sandwiched in high-quality source rocks (Jia et
al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2012), which was mostly called “shale
oil” in earlier literatures but now called “tight oil” (NPC, 2011;
Nelder, 2012). The connotation of shale oil is similar to that
of shale gas, only different in fluid type and phase behavior.
Shale oil refers to the in-situ retained oil resources occurring in
organic-rich mudstone-shale formations without being expelled
from the oil source rock, with matrix pores, organic pores and
fractures as the main reservoiring space (Zou et al., 2013).
Because the mobility of oil is much lower than that of natural
gas, there is a great uncertainty on producing shale oil flow of
commercial level from source rocks that are barely permeable.
So far, industrial breakthroughs have not been made except for
production in fractured mudstone.
Oil shale refers to the immature organic-rich mudstone-shale,
from which liquid hydrocarbons can be extracted through
destructive distillation and pyrolysis. Oil shale is also called
“artificial oil” and generally managed as solid mineral. The
future technological development will be subsurface in-situ
distillation and extraction (Wang et al., 2013). It should be noted
that the so-called “oil shale” often used in China’s oil field
exploration and production, such as the oil shale in the Member
2 of the Kongdian Formation in the Bohai Bay Basin, the oil
shale in the Member 7 of the Yanchang Formation in the Ordos
Basin, etc., are actually mature organic-rich oil source rocks

138

with foliation, and not oil shale in a strict sense.

3 Types and characteristics of the sourcereservoir assemblage of unconventional
hydrocarbons
3.1 Classification of source-reservoir assemblage
and its significance
There are many descriptions about the characteristics of
unconventional hydrocarbons (Guan et al., 1995; Sun et al., 2011;
Zou et al., 2013), which can be summarized as follows: (1) largearea distribution and continuous accumulation; (2) no conspicuous
caps or traps; (3) accumulation without being affected by
hydrodynamics; (4) low porosity and very low permeability;
and (5) large-scale stimulation measures and a “factory”
production mode. However, these descriptions are generally
and thus uunable to reflect the essential differences among the
unconventional hydrocarbon resources. Therefore, it is necessary
to further discuss the major controlling factors on the formation
of unconventional hydrocarbons, to analyze and summarize the
basic geological characteristics and distribution patterns.
We think that the spatial assemblage of source rocks and
reservoirs plays a critical controlling role in the formation of
unconventional oil and gas. Geologists have conducted systematic
researches on the source-reservoir assemblages of conventional
hydrocarbons using traditional petroleum geological theory, it
is concluded that there are mainly three types of assemblages,
including self-generation and self-reservoiring, lower-generation
and upper-reservoiring, and the upper-generation and lowerreservoiring. However, it has been proved by oil and gas
exploration practice that the source-reservoir assemblage
relationship is not decisive to the formation of conventional
reservoirs. All three types of assemblages mentioned above
are able to form big oil and gas fields, but there are still many
cases in which big fields cannot be found even if the conditions
of hydrocarbon generation and conservation are very favorable.
Therefore, the formation of conventional reservoirs requires
stricter conditions for spatial-temporal configuration of various
petroleum system elements. Under certain source-reservoir
conditions, the formation of big oil and gas fields depends more
on good migration pathways, trapping conditions and capping
conditions. Conversely, unconventional hydrocarbons primarily
characterized by retention or short-distance migration are
less demanding for trapping and capping conditions. Thus the
assemblage of source rock and reservoir becomes a decisive factor
for unconventional hydrocarbon accumulations.
Here we divided the source-reservoir assemblages controlling
the formation of unconventional reservoirs into three types:
source-reservoir neighboring type, source-reservoir integration
type, and source-reservoir separation type (Table 1). The

Sourcereservoir
separation
type

Sourcereservoir
neighboring
type

Sourcereservoir
integration
type

Coal pore, cleat,
fracture

—

Mature

Sandstone,
carbonate

Natural
gas
hydrate

Oil sand

—

—

MudstoneContinental facies
shale

Secondary
Mainly
Mainly primary pores
migration
sandstone

Key
technology

Increasing
permeability

Oil-generating
P, T, J,
depression and
K, E
slope

Horizontal
well, volume
fracturing
Solid minerals, Extraction,
Hydrodynamic
Basin margin,
heating, physical
In-situ
force,
J, K, E
bulge
separation
mining
Buoyance

Increasing
permeability

Destructive
distillation,
in-situ
mining

Solid minerals,
destructive
distillation,
artificial oil
P, T, J, Basin-margin
K, E
slope

Horizontal
well, volume
fracturing

—

Horizontal
well, volume
fracturing

—

Increasing
permeability

Pressure-reducing Pinnate
desorption,
horizontal
increasing
well,
permeability
fractuing

Principles of
technology

Exploration technology

P, T, J, Oil-generating
K, E
depression

Primary or Pressure
Interparticle
secondary difference
C, P, T, Depression,
pore, intraparticle
shortbetween
J, K, E
slope
dissolution pore,
distance source and
fracture
migration
reservoir

Primary or Pressure
Interparticle
secondary difference
pore, intraparticle
shortbetween
dissolution pore,
distance source and
fracture
migration
reservoir

Syncline

Favorable
area

∈ , S,
Depression,
C, P, T,
slope
J, K, E

C-P, J,
E

Major
layer

Distribution features

Submarine
Methane released
Marine
sediments which
Microbial
Pyrolysis,
Hydrodynamic
bottom
from solid hydrate，
water depth
Interparticle pore, Secondary
gas,
reducing
force,
—
sediment,
reducing pressure
greater than
fracture
migration
thermogenic
pressure, CO2
Buoyance
onshore
or increasing
300m or onshore
gas
displacement
permafrost
temperature
permafrost zone

Mature

CoalMarinemeasure
continental
High-over
Sandstone
Tight gas
source rocks transition facies,
mature
mainly continental facies

MudstoneContinental facies
Tight oil
shale

—

No
migration

MudstoneMudstoneContinental facies Low mature
shale
shale

—

Oil shale

Mature

MudstoneContinental facies
shale

Shale oil

Interparticle
pore, intraparticle
Mudstone- dissolution pore,
No
shale
lamellar schistosity migration
plane, organic pore,
fracture

—

Organic pore,
Marine facies，
interparticle
Mudstone- marine-continental High-over Mudstone- pore, intraparticle
No
Shale gas
shale
transition facies,
mature
shale
dissolution pore, clay migration
continental facies
mineral interlayer
pore, fracture

Migration
dynamic
force
—

Migration
mode

Characteristics
of migration and
accumulation

No
migration

Sedimentary
environment

Marinecontinental
Low-high
Coalbed
Coal seam
Coal seam
transition facies, rank coal
methane
continental facies

Thermal
evolution
degree

Reservoir layer
Reservoiring
space

Source rocks
Lithology

Type of
sourceType of
reservoir resource
assemblage
Lithology

Table 1 Classification and characteristics of the source-reservoir assemblages of the unconventional hydrocarbons in China

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

139

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

significance of the source-reservoir assemblage classification
lies in that, (1) it refines the classification of the unconventional
hydrocarbon resources to facilitate further study of their genetic
mechanisms, microscopic characteristics and distribution
patterns, as well as to enrich and develop the geological theory
for unconventional hydrocarbons; (2) it allows the study of
geological and resource evaluation methods and standards to
help developing comprehensive geological evaluation techniques
for unconventional hydrocarbons; (3) it can formulate scientific
and reasonable strategies of development that can effectively
guide the exploration and development of unconventional oil and
gas.

3.2 Source-reservoir neighboring type
T he sou r c e -r es e r voi r neig hb or i ng t y p e r efe r s t o t he
unconventional hydrocarbon resources accumulating in tight
reservoirs in close contact with high-quality source rocks, which
is also known as “tight oil and gas”. The tight reservoir can be
sandwiched in the source rocks to form a “sandwich” structure
or located on top or bottom of the source rocks to form an
alternating structure (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). The fluid phase behavior
in tight reservoirs depends on the thermal evolution degree of
source rocks. Source rocks within the oil-generation window
produce tight oil, while source rocks in gas-generation window
yield tight gas. Alternatively, tight oil and tight gas can coexist.
In sedimentary basins, tight reservoirs in close contact with

GR

Sublayer 1

GR

2040

2040

2070

2070

GR

RT

RT

RT

4100

2010

2010

2040

2040

2070

2070

Sublayer
3

Sublayer 2

RT

2010

Well J36
Depth/m

Well W04
Depth/m

Well W03
Depth/m

0

Upper member

RT

2010

Although the source-reservoir neighboring resources are
widely distributed, certain conditions need to be established
to form large scale oil-gas commercial accumulation: (1)
High-quality source rocks generally with TOC >2% are well

Lucaogou Formation

GR

Well W02
Depth/m

Recent volcanic reservoir play exploration and researches in
China indicate that there are two types of volcanic hydrocarbon
resources developed in the Carboniferous-Permian period
in the Yingcheng Formation of the Songliao Basin and
Northern Xinjiang: (1) volcanic rock reservoirs with favorable
petrophysical reservoir properties, which are controlled by local
structures or unconformities, dominated by structural-lithological or lithological-formation reservoirs; (2) large-scale tight
volcanic oil and gas, where tight volcanic rocks in close contact
with high-quality source rocks generally contain oil and gas,
and high yield can be obtained by artificial fracturing, showing
a great exploration potential (Hou et al., 2012). Thus, distribution of tight oil and gas is widespread. Certainly, there is also
a type of tight gas resource where reservoirs are far away from
source rocks, such as the Silurian tight sand gas from the underlying Cambrian-Ordovician source rocks in the Tarim Basin. It
belongs to the secondary tight gas which need good accumulation conditions, and can be regarded as a special type of tight
gas resource.

Lower member

Well W01
Depth/m

source rocks come in various types: clastic rock, carbonate rock,
or volcanic rock.

SP RT

SP RT

SP RT

-1850
-2000
-2150
-2300
-2450

0

4 km

-3 600
-3 800

3550

3150

4100

3600

3200

4150

3650

3250

4200

3700

3300

4250

3750

3350

Oil layer

Dry layer

Fig. 2

140

Water layer

3100

3100

3150

3200

0

-4 200

GR AC

4 km

GR AC

0

-4 400

4 km

Oil

-4 600

O il g

-4 800
-5 000

grou

pI

roup

II

O il g

-5 200
-5 400

(c)Fuyu tight oil in the southern Songliao Basin

TOC

3050

3050

-4 000
Elevation/m

Elevation/m

-1700

Well Q215 Well C45

TOC RT

TOC RT

O il g

roup

III

ro

Member 3 of Shahejie Formation
Lower part
Middle-upper part

SP RT

RT

Well J98x Well ST1

SP RT

Member 4 of
Quantou
Formation

Well C27

Well J174 Well J173 Well J28
Depth/m Depth/m Depth/m

3800

Member 1 of
Qingshakou
Formation

SP RT

3500

TOC

(b)Tight oil in Lucaogou Formation, Jimusar sag, Junggar Basin

Well Q227
Well Q226

Well J251
Depth/m

RT

4100

400 m

(a)Tight oil in Member 7 of Yanchang Formation in Ordos Basin

Well H52

TOC

up I
V
-5 600
(d)Tight oil in Shahejie Formation, Shulu sag, Bohai Bay Basin

Oil shale/ black mudstone

Marlstone

Conglomerate

Profiles of typical source-reservoir assemblages of tight oil in China

Fault

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

Well PL11

Well G23
GR AC

Well S417
Well Z17 GR AC
GR AC

Well L12

Well S367

Well PL9
Well PL1
SP RT
-2 060 SP RT Well PL6

Well L35
GR AC
Well S356

GR AC

GR AC

SP RT

Well PL3
SP RT

SP RT

-2 140

Well S334 GR AC

Well PL2
SP RT

-2280

Elevation/m

Mem .
8

Xiashihezi
Fm.

0

Mem .
1

-2260

Shanxi
Fm.

-2240

6 km

Elevation/m

-2000
-2400

-2800

Sublaer
5
Sublaer
4

-2 380

0

Sublaer
3

3 km

Sublaer
2
1
Sublaer

(b)Tight gas of Xujiahe Formation in the central Sichuan Basin

0 1 km
Xishanyao
Fm.

Well K191
Well K192
SP RT

Sangonghe
Fm.
S
B a da n d g r
o
Sa aowa up 1
Bad nd gro n Fm.
aow up 2
an F
m.

Well LS3

-3 000

Well K21
SP RT

Mem. 1of
Xujiahe Fm.

Xishanyao
Fm.

SP RT

Sangonghe
Fm.

Sangonghe
S Fm.
B a da n d g ro u
aow p 1
an F
m.
Sa nd
B ad ao gr ou p 2
w an Fm
.

Well K19-3
SP RT

GR RT

Gas layer

Den

-3 900

Fig. 3

Water layer

Source rock

Coal seam

glou

ku F

m.

Me
Yin g m b e r 2 o
f
chen
g Fm
.

-3 600

Dry layer

0.4km

GR RT

-3 300

-3200

(c) Tight gas in Turpan-Hami Basin

0

Well LS301

Elevation/m

-1600

SP RT

-2 300

(a)Sulige tight gas in Ordos Basin
Well K24
SP RT

Well L18

-2 460

Mem .
2

-2220

-2 220

Mem. 2 of Xujiahe Fm.

Elevation/m

-2200

Mem .
7

GR AC

Member 1 of
Yingcheng Fm.

(d)Tight gas in Yingtai fault depression of Songliao Basin
Mudstone

Fault

Profiles of typical source-reservoir assemblages of tight gas in China

developed. Certainly the criterion for source rocks varies from
basin to basin. High-quality source rocks provide sufficient
hydrocarbon sources and produce great differential sourcereservoir pressure through hydrocarbon generation to overcome
the high capillary resistance of the tight reservoir and complete
hydrocarbon accumulation. (2) Although the reservoir is tight,
certain porosity (generally > 8%) is required to ensure the
minimal requirement for reservoiring space. (3) Tight reservoirs
are stably distributed over a large area to ensure large resource
scale. For example, for tight oil in Bakken and Eagle Ford in
North America, the reservoir area can reach tens of thousands
of square kilometers. In China, the magnitude of tight oil and
gas ranges from hundreds to thousands of square kilometers. (4)
Weak tectonism and the absence of large destructive fractures
can prevent oil and gas from escape.
The above-mentioned conditions determine the following basic
characteristics of source-reservoir neighboring type resources:
(1) the resource is dominated by primary migration or shortdistance secondary migration, with the differential pressure
between source and reservoir being the main driver; (2) the
reservoir lithologies include tight sandstone, carbonate rock
and volcanic rock, etc. Micro-nanopores of inorganic origin are
mainly developed, such as the interparticle pores, intraparticle
pores, dissolution pores, blowholes, etc. Individual pores are
poorly connected and have an subsurface permeability of
generally less than 0.1 mD; (3) oil and gas saturation is high,
generally greater than 70%, and the maximum can be over 90%;

(4) dissipation during migration is minor and the efficiency
of migration and accumulation is high; (5) the resources are
mainly distributed in depressions and slopes with large oil
and gas bearing areas but low resource abundance as well as
locally developed sweet spots; (6) the main target of technical
measures is to increase the production per well. Horizontal well
and volume fracturing are the key technique to improve the
production per well and realize effective exploitation.

3.3 Source-reservoir integration type resource
The source-reservoir integration type resource refers to the oil
and gas resource accumulating in various hydrocarbon source
rocks, which are essentially the hydrocarbons stranded in source
rocks. Since the hydrocarbon source rock serves as both source
and reservoir, the source-reservoir integration type resources
can also be called “source rock hydrocarbons”, mainly including
coalbed methane, shale gas, shale oil, oil shale, etc. The sourcereservoir integration type resources have drawn widespread and
high attention worldwide mainly because of the breakthroughs
and massive exploitation in coalbed methane and shale gas. The
“shale gas revolution” in the United States, in particular, has
overturned the traditional paradigm of hydrocarbon geology
and exploitation techniques, enabling people to realize that
oil and gas resources can be extracted directly from their
generation source rocks previously considered as hydrocarbongenerating rocks and cap rocks only. The previous evaluation
of hydrocarbon source rocks focus on the ability and quantity

141

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

of hydrocarbon generation. It is now necessary to evaluate
the retained hydrocarbon quantity, reservoiring capacity and
productivity.
The source-reservoir integration type resources mainly occur in
the organic-rich mudstone-shale and coal seams. The organicrich mudstone-shale controls the formation and distribution of
shale gas, shale oil and oil shale, while the coal seam controls
the coalbed methane, which is quite different from the former in
terms of formation mechanisms and controlling factors.
3.3.1 Shale oil and shale gas
Hydrocarbon retained in the mudstone-shale is the major type
of source-reservoir integration resources, mainly distributed in
various sedimentary basins. Mudstone-shale belongs to finegrained sediments with grain sizes smaller than 0.0039 mm
which mainly formed in the sedimentary environment with
weak to quiet hydrodynamic conditions. While the organicrich mudstone-shale is primarily deposited under anaerobic
and reducing environment, such as marine deep-water shelf,
bays, lakes, and continental deep to semi-deep lakes, etc. It is
composed mainly of fine grained sediments, clay and organic
matters of Type I and Type II (Zou et al., 2010). Whether the
hydrocarbons retained in the organic-rich mudstone-shale has
industrial exploitation value depends on the resource conditions,
i.e., quantity of retained hydrocarbons and the hydrocarbon
occur ring conditions, and the engineering exploitation
conditions, such as suitability for drilling, frackability and
regional stress state, etc.
It has been testified by production practice that the following
eight factors need to be taken into account in the evaluation of
the oil and gas resources in mudstone-shale:
(1) Abundance of organic matter

commercially exploited so far is dominated by shales with Type
I-II organic matters. Carbonaceous mudstone-shale dominated
by Type III is quite special, and may be conducive to shale gas
enrichment during the high evolution stage.
(3) Thermal evolution degree
A basic condition of shale gas enrichment is that the thermal
maturity is in the primarily gas-generating stage. For example,
Ro of the North American marine shale is generally 1.1%-2.5%;
the marine shale in China, mainly the early Palaeozoic shale,
has high thermal evolution degree with Ro around 2.5%-4.0%. A
new understanding of the “secondary or relayed gas generation”
from cracking of scattered liquid hydrocarbons not only explains
the sources of the shale gas, but also provides important basis
for finding big oil and gas fields in old marine sequences
(Zhao et al., 2011). The continental mudstone-shale in China is
primarily at the thermal maturity stage of oil window and the
wet gas–condensate thermal evolution with Ro of 0.8%-1.4%. It
is considered that favorable prospecting of shale gas is when Ro
is 0.9%-1.4%, while shale oil would be more likely discovered
from the residual liquid hydrocarbons in the mudstone-shale at
the oil window. Oil shale refer to the immature oil source rock
with Ro values generally less than 0.6%, which is considered as
high quality oil shale if oil content is more than 6%.
(4) Reservoiring space
The matrix porosity of mudstone-shale is generally 1%-2%,
no more than 4%-5%. With the increasing thermal evolution
degree, organic pores can form, thus providing the necessary
reservoiring space for hydrocarbon storage (Passey et al., 2010;
Slatt and O’Brien, 2011).
(5) Thickness of the organic-rich section

Retained hydrocarbon quantity is positively correlated to TOC
content (Lu et al., 2012), generally TOC > 2% is required.

Generally the continuous thickness required is greater than 30
m in order to meet the requirement for the resource scale of
industrial exploitation (Fig. 4).

(2) Type of organic matter

(6) Content of brittle minerals and clay minerals

In theory, Type I-II organic matters are more favorable due
to their high hydrocarbon generation potential. Shale gas

In order to meet the needs of massive fracturing reformation,
the content of the brittle minerals, such as quartz and feldspar,

Well Z104
Longmaxi
Fm.
Wufeng
Fm.

Well CX1

Well N201

GR

GR DTCO

Well JY1

TOC

GR

20

RT

2180

80

1850

2200

1900

140

GR DTCO

1950
2000

2260

2050

2300

2260
2300

2340
2380
2420

2340

Longmaxi
Fm.

0

8 km

2380
2420

Wufeng
Fm.

0

2 km

2460
2500
2540

(a)Shale gas of Longmaxi Formation in Changning area, Sichuan Basin

(b)Shale gas of Longmaxi Formation in Fuling area, Sichuan Basin

Gas-bearing layer Black shale

Fig. 4

142

Fault

Profiles of the source-reservoir assemblages of shale gas in the Sichuan Basin

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

is generally required to be more than 40%, while the content of
clay minerals should be less than 30%.
(7) Formation pressure
Overpressure is conducive to the preservation of retained
hydrocarbons as pressure would increase both the adsorbed and
free hydrocarbons in the pore spaces, and is more favorable for
higher yields.
(8) Preservation conditions
Although mudstone-shale itself has good sealing capability,
strong tectonic uplift and fracture development can cause the
dissipation of oil and gas. Therefore depressions and gentle
slopes are favorable exploration areas for hydrocarbons in
mudstone-shale (Guo and Liu, 2013). The key to exploiting
hydrocarbon in mudstone-shale is to improve the permeability
of reservoirs. Horizontal drilling and volume fracturing can
dramatically improve the production per well.
3.3.2 Coalbed methane (CBM)
Coalbed methane (CBM), or coal seam gas, is the hydrocarbon
gas formed in the process of coalification and dominated by
methane. CBM mainly occurs in adsorbed state on the surface
of coal or inside the microfissures (Zhang, 2002). The initial
goal of exploiting CBM is to prevent gas explosion in coal
mines. In the beginning, the CBM is mainly extracted by mine
pump drainage, and nowadays it has developed into an emerging
industry dominated by subsurface drilling.
The controlling factors of CBM enrichment mainly include:
(1) gas generating potential, which is mainly related to the coal
type and thermal evolution degree. According to numerous
experimental analyses and production testing data, the amount
of the gas generated in coal seam is much larger than that has
been retained, generally greater than 50 m3/t. In the main coal
seams, the gas generation can reach as high as about 300 m3/
t. The content of gas in coal seam varies greatly from 1 to 30
m 3/t. Coals in the stage of high thermal evolution degree are
still quite capable of generating gas, which provides theoretical
support for the evaluation of high rank coal CBM resources
in China. (2) Adsorption capacity, which is affected by R o,
maceral and burial depth and other factors. Adsorbed gas
accounts for more than 70% of CBM and is the main component
of CBM. The adsorption capability is positively correlated to
the content of vitrinite component. With increasing R o, the
adsorption amount increases; while as the depth increases, the
coal seam adsorption amount increases first and then decreases,
showing an adsorption turning point, which is controlled by the
combined effect of temperature and pressure (Sun et al., 2014).
(3) Sealing conditions, which is necessary for the enrichment of
CBM, controlled by temperature-pressure field, tectonic setting

and other factors, and characterized by synclinical enrichment.
(4) CBM exploitation and development, which is primarily via
pressure-reducing desorption and fracturing to improve the
permeability of coal seams so as to increase production per well
(Su et al., 2008; Song et al., 2012; Song et al., 2013). Currently
the main techniques are pinnate horizontal well and fracturing.
Note that there are certain transitional types between the
source-reservoir integration resources and the source-reservoir
neighboring resources, some of which are very difficult to
distinguish from each other. For example, tight marl oil was
found in the lower part of Member 3 of the Shahejie Formation
in the Shulu sag, which belongs to the Jizhong Depression of the
Bohai Bay Basin (Liang et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2014), but the
source rocks and reservoirs are mostly mixed, making it difficult
to discriminate them strictly.

3.4 Source-reservoir separation type resources
According to the traditional hydrocarbon accumulation model,
in the case of source-reservoir separation, oil and gas generally
need to undergo migration, mainly forming conventional
resources. If such resources were subject to degradation, they
would turn into a special kind of unconventional resources,
such as heavy oil, oil sands, etc. Since heavy oil resources can
be exploited by conventional vertical drilling, here we only
focus oil sands. Natural gas hydrate is another special type
of unconventional source-reservoir separation resources. In
some areas, tight gas can be formed even in the case of sourcereservoir separation, such as the Silurian tight sandstone gas
in the Tarim Basin (Wang et al., 2013). However, this is not a
common case because the separation of source and reservoir
makes it difficult to form large-scale tight gas.
3.4.1 Oil sands
Oil sands, sometimes called bituminous ore, refer to the
sedimentary sands rich in natural asphalt, which are the product
of the crude oil after losing light components in the process of
migration or in situ biodegradation. The underground viscosity
of oil sands is generally greater than 1×10 4 mPa·s. Oil sands
are formed from hydrocarbons (palaeo-reservoirs) subjected
to hydrodynamic, biodegradation and oxidation processes, and
mainly distributed in the margin of basins or the uplift zones
(Cao et al., 2012). Due to the poor mobility, oil sands are usually
exploited through solid mineral mining. Oil will be extracted
through hot-water washing, solvent extraction, and hot dry
distillation, etc. Oil sands are widely distributed worldwide with
variable enrichment degrees. The main indicators for evaluating
the industry production value of oil sands include: (1) High oil
content, which is required to be more than 10% for rich ore. Oil
content is related to oil source condition, reservoir properties
and oil degradation level. (2) Relatively large scale of resources,
for example, the amount of recoverable oil sands in the Alberta

143

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

Basin, Canada is as high as 28.3×109 t. (3) Favorable exploitation
conditions, such as shallow burial depth and flat terrain, which are
advantageous to exploitation of oil sands. In China, recoverable
oil sands amount to 2.258×109 t (MLR, 2009), which can be
found in almost all of the major hydrocarbon-bearing basins.
Unfortunately, this type of resource is generally considered low
development prospect in China due to its scattered distribution,
complex types, and relatively low oil content.
3.4.2 Natural gas hydrate
Natural gas hydrate (NGH), also called combustible ice, is a
caged crystalline solid complex composed of water and natural
gas (methane) under appropriate temperature and pressure, and
mainly forms in the submarine sediment or onshore permafrost
(Jin, 2000). Among all types of oil and gas resources, NGH is
the least studied type. The mechanism of NGH remains to be
further studied, and the future of NGH development is quite
remote. Currently, there are three basic requirements for the
formation of NGH (Jin et al., 2006; Li et al., 2011): (1) Proper
gas hydrates stability zone, which is mainly controlled by
temperature, pressure, gas composition, etc. The stability zone
is equivalent to the trap and cap rocks for the conventional oil
and gas accumulations, with unsteady state characteristics. The
equilibrium will be damaged once the conditions change and
can cause the dissipation of NGH. (2) Reservoir layers, which
are capable of reservoiring a large amount of NGH. NGH
comprises solid crystals rich in water and methane molecules,
thus requiring reservoirs with high porosity and permeability.
Apparently, the Cenozoic coarse-grained clastic sediment is the
most ideal reservoir (Yu et al., 2014). (3) Gas sources for NGH
include both biogenic type and thermogenic type. No matter
what type is, the generated natural gas has to be migrated into
a stability zone before forming NGH. In this case, the source
rocks and reservoirs are generally separated. Therefore the
resources are categorized to the source-reservoir separation
resources. At present, NGH is commonly regarded as a kind
of prospective unconventional natural gas resources with
huge potential. A significant amount of fundamental research
on NGH is being undertaken worldwide aiming to making
technical breakthroughs in NGH development.

4. Development potential of China’s
unconventional hydrocarbons
Source-reservoir neighboring resources can be seen as the
natural extension of conventional oil and gas resources because
of their superimposition in resource distribution. Besides, due
to the mature exploitation technique and its strong commonality
relative to that for conventional hydrocarbon resources, such
resources can be developed rapidly after the economic barrier
is broken through. However, source-reservoir integration
resources are quite different. Essential differences in reservoir

144

and occurrence conditions between the source-reservoir
integration resource and conventional resource determine
that, a more purposely build technical system is needed to
realize cost-effective exploitation. What is more, one needs to
appreciate that a regional breakthrough does not represent an
overall breakthrough for this type of resources and the solution
to all problems. Further researches are still required to make
substantial progress. Source-reservoir separation resources are
quite special. For example, the difference of heavy oil and oil
sand resources lies in the decisive factor of reservoir formation.
NGH development in the global scope is still at the early
exploring stage, major technical breakthrough has to be made for
NGH recovery before industrialization. Therefore, it is of great
importance for a healthy development of China’s unconventional
oil and gas to take a rational look at the development prospect
of different types of source-reservoir assemblages and make
scientific ranking.

4.1 Source-reservoir neighboring type resources
Tight gas is the earliest explored type of unconventional oil and
gas resources discovered with many breakthroughs. As early
as in the 1960s, the Zhongba tight gas field was discovered
in the western Sichuan Basin. However, limited knowledge
and technology at that time made it impossible to produce
economically. Therefore, massive exploration and development
of tight gas was restricted. At the beginning of the 21st century,
a few years after the discovery of the Sulige Gasfield in the
Ordos Basin, exploration and development work was ever
stagnated for quite a while due to the low production per well
and relatively high development cost.
Since 2005, technological breakthrough and large-scale
industrialisation have promoted the effective development
of the Sulige tight gas field. By 2013, the output has reached
21.2×109 m3, making it the largest onshore gas field in China.
At present, two major tight gas areas in China have come into
large-scale production, i.e., the upper Palaeozoic reservoirs
in the Ordos Basin and the Xujiahe Formation in the Sichuan
Basin (Li et al., 2013). New discoveries of tight gas have also
been made in the Tarim, Tuha, Songliao, and Bohai Bay basins.
By the end of 2013, the cumulative proven geological reserves
of tight gas in China had reached 3.8×1012 m3, and the annual
output was about 34×109 m3, accounting for approximately 28%
of the total gas production in China. The tight gas resources
in China are mainly distributed in three major systems, i.e.,
the Carboniferous-Permian, the Jurassic-Cretaceous, and the
Palaeogene intervals, and are primarily dominated by coal
measures. According to the latest resource evaluation results (Qiu
et al., 2012), the favorable exploration area of tight gas in China
is about 600×103 km2, the geological resources are (17-24)×1012
m3, and recoverable resources are (8-11)×1012 m3. Considering
all kinds of conditions, tight gas is predicted to enter a stage of

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

rapid development and the production scale is expected to reach
(60-80)×109 m3. Thus tight gas is a realistic resource to maintain
the sustainable growth of China’s natural gas production.

decade and significantly increase the production of CBM with
an expected annual output of about 30×109 m3 (Qing et al., 2012;
Qing et al., 2013).

Tight oil is another type of source-reservoir neighboring
resources. Despite of a late start, it has become one of the
highlights of recent oil exploration in China. All major
Mesozoic-Cenozoic continental basins in China are qualified
for the accumulation of tight oil resources and the reservoir
types include mainly tight sandstone and lacustrine carbonate
rocks (Zou et al., 2012). According to the results of current
preliminary evaluation, the favorable exploration area of tight
oil is about (410-540)×103 km 2 , the geological resources are
(11.3-13.5)×109 t. Tight oil is mainly distributed in the Member
7 of Yanchang Formation in Ordos Basin, the Permian reservoir
in the Junggar Basin, and the Fuyang reservoir interval in the
Songliao Basin (Wang et al., 2014). Important advances have
been made in the exploitation test on the tight oil of the Member
7 of the Yanchang Formation in the Ordos Basin; through
horizontal drilling and volume fracturing, the initial output per
well can reach over one hundred tons, with daily production
per well in production reaching 15-18 t, demonstrating a good
development prospect (Yang et al., 2013). At present, in all
exploration areas, effective methods of exploiting tight oil are
being actively applied. Great breakthroughs will be made in
the next five years. The production scale of China’s tight oil is
estimated to be (30-40)×106 t, which is of important strategic
significance to the stable growth of China’s crude oil production.

In China, shale gas is now the buzzword of unconventional
hydrocarbon resources with great potential and challenges.
Considering the resource conditions, the marine shale resources of
the Silurian Longmaxi Formation in the southern China are more
realistic. High-production gas flows have been obtained in three
areas in Sichuan Basin, including Weiyuan-Changning, FushunYongchuan, and Jiaoshiba of Fuling areas. It was preliminarily
confirmed that the favorable area is (50-60)×103 km 2 , and
recoverable resources is (4-5)×1012 m3. The concentrated drilling
and pilot production also succeeded, especially in Jiaoshiba of
Fuling areas, where the daily gas production per well averaged
at 140×103m3. The capability of industrial production in this area
indicates that the exploitation of shale gas in Longmaxi Formation
is likely to speed up.

4.2 Requirement of technical innovation and
industrialization exploration in source-reservoir
integration type resources
CBM is an unconventional natural gas resource to which
China gave priority and strongly promoted a few decades ago.
The recoverable resources amount to about 11×1012 m3. After
nearly 20 years of development, breakthroughs in high-rank
coal CBM have been made. Pilot industrialized production
has been achieved in some areas such as the Qinshui Basin in
Shanxi Province and Hancheng area in Shaanxi Province. In
2013, China’s subsurface CBM production was about 3.0×109
m 3. Compared with the anticipation and massive investment,
however, the development of China’s CBM is still barely
satisfactory and comparatively in significant. The coordination
mechanism of the CBM industry has to be further improved and
the resource conditions and key technologies have to be further
identified and studied. The core is to increase the production
per well and increase the rate of production. The low-rank coal
CBM, medium-high rank soft coal and deeply buried CBM
resources account for about 70% of total resources. Technically
there has been no effective development on this type of CBM
in China. It is estimated that a period of technical preparation
will further accelerate the pace of CBM development in the next

The development of shale gas in China also faces some
challenges: (1) Due to limited exploration and assessment of
the resources potential of the marine-continent transitional
facies and lacustrine shale gas in the Cambrian Qiongzhusi
Formation, further evaluation is still needed. (2) Strong tectonic
movement and deep burial make it difficult to prospect the
economical enrichment areas of shale gas. (3) The complex
ter rain in southern China, mostly mountains and hills,
brings great difficulty and high cost to carry out engineering
construction. (4) China has a shortage of water resources and
needs the new technology such as anhydrous fracturing (Li et
al., 2012; Qiu et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2012). According to the
comprehensive evaluation, the marine shale gas in China is
realistic, the development of which is likely to speed up in some
areas. However, we cannot expect a full-scale breakthrough
within a short time. The future scientific development includes
emphasising on technical innovation and exploitation testing as
well as establishing theoretical models for shale gas development
that suit for China’s specific geological characteristics through
progressive exploration. It is expected to achieve an industrial
output of 20×109 m3 in the next decade.
The basic research on the formation mechanisms of shale oil in
China has just started. Shale oil previously found in mudstoneshale is mainly fracture-type shale oil, which was discovered
in the Songliao, Bohai Bay, and Jianghan basins, although they
were all of small scale. In recent years, exploration of oil in
the pores of mudstone-shale has begun. Low-production oil
flows were found in some continental oil source rocks, such as
Member 3 of the Shahejie Formation in the Bohai Bay Basin,
and Member 3 of the Hetaoyuan Formation in the Biyang
Depression, demonstrating the presence of continental shale oil
(Wu et al., 2013). However, the outlook of the resource potential
and the economical development stays uncertain.

145

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

High production of oil had been obtained from oil shale through
dry distillation during 1950-1960s, reaching up to 790×103 t. At
present, there is still production in some areas such as Fushun
area in Liaoning Province and Huadian area in Jilin Province,
with an annual production of about 550×103 t. However, due
to the inherent limitations of environment and cost in the
traditional dry distillation process, it is difficult to achieve largescale development of the oil shale resources before significant
breakthroughs are made in technology of in-situ exploitation of
oil shale.

4.3 Natural gas hydrates, a promising sourcereservoir separation resource in the future
Natural gas hydrates (NGH) are mainly distributed in the
northern continental margin of the South China Sea, the
continental slope of the East China Sea, and the permafrost
zones in Tibetan Plateau and northeastern China. According to
the NGH samples obtained in the northern continental slope of
South China Sea, 10 favorable areas of gas hydrate resources
have been preliminarily selected, including the Dongsha,
Shenhu, Xisha, Southeast Hainan, South Zhongjian, North
Wan’an, North Beikang, Central Nansha, and East Liyue areas.
NGH samples were also obtained in the permafrost zone of the
Qilian Mountain. According to the preliminary evaluation, the
permafrost zones in the Qiangtang Basin, Qinghai-Tibet Plateau
and Qilian Mountain are likely to have good prospects of NGH
resources, followed by the northeast China permafrost zone.
Recently, China has further strengthened the basic research and
resource investigation of NGH, which is likely to accelerate the
development (Zhang et al., 2013; Cai et al., 2014).
Although oil sands are widely distributed in China, the quality
and the total amount are far inferior to the Canadian oil sand
resources. The oil sands in China practically belong to “dry
asphalt”, which are generally of low grade. For the oil sands
with the oil content of over 10%, the recoverable resources
only account for 2%, which is not qualified for large-scale
exploitation.

5 Conclusions
(1) The source-reservoir assemblages play a key controlling
role in the formation of unconventional oil and gas, which can
be divided into three types, i.e., source-reservoir neighboring
type, source–reservoir integration type, and source-reservoir
separation type. They differ in formation mechanisms,
geological characteristics and distribution patterns, and are
much different in resource potential and development prospects.
(2) The source-reservoir neighboring resources are essentially
“tight hydrocarbons”, mainly including tight oil and tight
gas. The key controlling factor is the large-area of the tight
reservoir in close contact with high-quality source rocks. The

146

resources are widely distributed in the Mesozoic-Cenozoic
continental deposits and the Late Palaeozoic marine-continent
transitional coal measures. They are often co-genetic with and
superimposed over conventional hydrocarbons, and have great
resource potential. If major technical breakthrough can be
made, then this type resource can serve as a natural extension
of conventional oil and gas exploration and exploitation.
Breakthroughs have already been made in several basins in
China and the resources are expected to be developed rapidly in
the next few years, making it the most realistic unconventional
resources.
(3) In essence, the source-reservoir integration resources are
“source rock-derived hydrocarbons”, mainly including coalbed
methane, shale gas, shale oil, oil shale, etc., which come in
many forms with great differences among those types. Although
this type of resource is more widely distributed around the
world, resources of this type with real commercial value of
industrial exploitation require not only favorable hydrocarbon
source rock indicators, but also appropriate reservoir conditions
for transformation by volume fracturing, and purposely made
technology as well. Coalbed methane and shale gas are the
major source-reservoir integration resources in China, and have
geological resource conditions different from those in North
America. Commercial production and/or local breakthroughs
have been achieved in some areas. In the next 10 years, the
source-reservoir integration resources shall act as an important
strategic alternative resource. Technical innovation and
industrial development test shall be strengthened in persistent
exploration in a bid to achieve rapid development.
(4) The source-reservoir separation resources are quite special.
Oil sand resources in China are of poor quality, highly discrete
distribution and are not ready for large-scale development.
Several favorable areas of NGH in the South China Sea have
been delineated after recent marine survey and evaluation. NGH
exploration is likely to accelerate in the near future through
basic research, resource investigation and production testing.
Commercial development of NGH is of important strategic
significance to China’s long-term energy supply.
(5) With increasing degree of exploration in China’s major
hydrocarbon-bearing basins, unconventional hydrocarbons
have become important resources that cannot be ignored. At
present, the Songliao, Bohai Bay and Ordos basins have partly
entered the stage of developing tight oil and gas. Because the
development of unconventional resources in China only started
around a decade ago, our knowledge on the resource conditions,
engineering conditions and industrialization routes is still quite
limited or lacking. Therefore, we need to strengthen the research
on source-reservoir assemblages to understand the formation
conditions and geological characteristics of three types of
resources, i.e., source-reservoir neighboring type, source-

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

reservoir integration type, and source-reservoir separation
type. This is of significant importance for understanding
the connotation of resources, evaluating enrichment zones,
addressing technical challenges as well as formulating scientific
and rational planning of development.

Acknowledgments
We would like to express our gratitude to all those who have
participated in this research, including Yang Tao, Zhang
Guosheng, Yan Weipeng, Wang Shejiao, Guo Bincheng, Wu
Xiaozhi, Li Xin, Huang Fuxi, Liang Kun, Huang Jinliang,
etc. Our sincere thanks should also go to Academicians Zhao
Wenzhi and Jia Chengzao, and Professor Zou Caineng for their
guidance during the writing of this paper. Finally we greatly
appreciate relevant oil fields for supporting this research and
sharing their data.
This work was funded by National Science and Technology
Major Project of China (Grant No. 2011ZX05043), and Major
Science and Technology Special Project of China National
Petroleum Corporation (Grant No: 2013E-0502)

References
Cai J J, Lu Z Q, He J X, et al. Geochemical behaviors of carbonates associated with gas hydrate in the Qilian Mountain permafrost. Natural Gas
Industry, 2014, 34(2): 143-153(in Chinese with English abstract).
Cao P, Zou W H, Dai C R, et al. A review of oil sands. Xinjiang Petroleum
Geology, 2012, 33(6): 747-750(in Chinese with English abstract).
Curtis J B. Fractured shale gas systems. AAPG Bulletin, 2002, 86(11):19211938.
Guan D S, Niu J Y, Guo L N, et al. Unconventional petroleum geology in
China. Beijing: Petroleum Industry Press, 1995(in Chinese).
Guo T L, Liu R B. Implications from marine shale gas exploration breakthrough in complicated structural area at high thermal stage: taking
Longmaxi Formation in Well JY1 as an example. Natural Gas Geoscience, 2013, 24(4):643-651(in Chinese with English abstract).
Hou L H, Zhu R K, Zhao X, et al. The control factors and distribution laws
of volcanic oil and gas reservoir in China. Engineering Science, 2012,
14(6):77-86(in Chinese with English abstract).
Jia C Z, Zheng M, Zhang Y F. Four important theoretical issues of unconventional petroleum geology. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2014, 35(1):1-10(in
Chinese with English abstract).
Jia C Z, Zou C N, Li J Z, et al. Assessment criteria, main types, basic features and resource prospects of the tight oil in China. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2012, 33(3):343-350(in Chinese with English abstract).
Jin Q H, Zhang G X, Yang M Z, et al. Introduction of natural gas hydrate
resources. Beijing: Science Press, 2006(in Chinese).
Jin Q H. Gas hydrate:a new future energy. Engineering Science, 2000, 2(11):
29-34(in Chinese with English abstract).
Li J Z, Guo B C, Zheng M, et al. Main types, geological features and resource potential of tight sandstone gas in China. Natural Gas Geoscience, 2012, 23(4):607-615(in Chinese with English abstract).
Li J Z, Li D H, Dong D Z, et al. Comparison and enlightenment on forma-

tion condition and distribution characteristics of shale gas between
China and U.S. Engineering Science, 2012, 14(6): 56-63(in Chinese
with English abstract).
Li J, Wei G Q, Xie Z Y, et al. Accumulation mechanism and main controlling factors of large tight sandstone gas fields in China: cases study on
Ordos Basin and Sichuan Basin. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2013, 34(S1): 1428(in Chinese with English abstract).
Li Q P, Zhang X H, Lu X B. Advances in formation mechanism and dissociation kinetics of gas hydrate in sediments. Advances in Mechanics,
2011, 41(1): 1-14(in Chinese with English abstract).
Liang H B, Kuang H W, Liu J Q, et al. Discussion on origin for marls of the
Member 3 of Shahejie Formation of Paleogene in Shulu sag of Central
Hebei depression. Journal of Palaeogeography, 2007, 9(2): 167-174(in
Chinese with English abstract).
Lu S F, Huang W B, Chen F W, et al. Classification and evaluation criteria
of shale oil and gas resources: discussion and application. Petroleum
Exploration and Development, 2012, 39(2): 249-256(in Chinese with

English abstract).
Luo X R, Zhang L K, Lei Y H. Dynamic studies on hydrocarbon migration
and accumulation: methodology and application. Chinese Journal of
Geology, 2012, 47(4):1188-1210(in Chinese with English abstract).
National Energy Administration(NEA). Shale gas industry policy. Beijing:
NEA, 2013(in Chinese).
National Petroleum Council(NPC). Potential of North American unconventional oil resource. Washington, D.C: National Petroleum Council,2011:8-11.
Nelder C. Energy independence, or impending oil shocks? ZDNet, 2012.
Oil and Gas Resources Strategic Research Center of the Ministry of Land
and Resources(MLR). Oil sands resources evaluation in China. Beijing:
China Land Press, 2009(in Chinese).
Passey Q R, Bohacs K, Esch W L, et al. From oil prone source rock to gas
producing shale reservoir-geologic and petrophysical characterization of
unconventional shale gas reservoirs. SPE 131350, 2010.
Qin Y, Yuan L, Cheng Y P, et al. Scenario predication for the mid term and
long term coalbed methane production scale of surface drilling wells in
China. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2013, 34(3): 489-495(in Chinese with English abstract).
Qin Y, Yuan L, Hu Q T, et al. Status and development orientation of coal
bed methane exploration and development technology in China. Coal
Science and Technology, 2012, 40(10): 1-6(in Chinese with English abstract).
Qiu Z J, Zhao W Z, Deng S T. Development prospect and strategic significance of tight gas and shale gas in China. Engineering Science, 2012,
14(6): 4-8(in Chinese with English abstract).
Qiu Z J, Zhao W Z, Deng S T. Tight gas and shale gas development roadmap. China Petroleum and Petrochemical, 2012, (17): 18-21(in Chinese
with English abstract).
Slatt R M, O’Brien N R. Pore types in the Barnett and Woodford gas shales:
contribution to understanding gas storage and migration pathways in
fine grained rocks. AAPG Bulletin, 2011, 95(12): 2017-2030.
Song Y, Liu S B, Hong F, et al. Geochemical characteristics and genesis of
coalbed methane in China. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2012, 33(S1): 99-106(in
Chinese with English abstract).
Song Y, Liu S B, Ju Y W, et al. Coupling between gas content and permeability controlling enrichment zones of high abundance coal bed methane. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2013, 34(3): 417-426(in Chinese with English

147

J.Li et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,135-148

abstract).
Standardization Committee of Petroleum Geology Exploration(SCPGE).
SYT 6832 2011 Geological evaluating methods for tight sandstone gas.
Beijing: Petroleum Industry Press, 2011(in Chinese).
Su X B, Chen R, Lin X Y, et al. Application of adsorption potential theory
in the fractionation of coalbed gas during the process of adsorption/
desorption. Acta Geologica Sinica, 2008, 82(10): 1382-1389(in Chinese
with English abstract).
Sun F J, Wang B, Li M X, et al. Major geological factors controlling the
enrichment and high yield of coalbed methane in the southern Qinshui
Basin. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2014, 35(6): 1070-1079(in Chinese with
English abstract).
Sun Z D, Jia C Z, Li X F, et al. Unconventional petroleum exploration and
exploitation. Beijing: Petroleum Industry Press, 2011(in Chinese).
U.S.Energy Information Administration(EIA). Review of emerging resources: U.S.shale gas and shale oil plays. Washington, D.C: EIA, 2014.
Wang B, Zhao Y Q, Wang S Y, et al. Characteristics and main controlling
factors of tight sandstone reservoirs in Silurian of Kongquehe slope,
Tarim Basin. Petroleum Geology & Experiment, 2013, 35(6): 615-620(in
Chinese with English abstract).
Wang S J, Yu Y J, Guo Q L, et al. New advance in resources evaluation of
tight oil. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2014, 35(6): 1095-1105(in Chinese with
English abstract).
Wang Y P, Wang Y W, Meng X L, et al. Enlightenment of American’s oil
shale in-situ retorting technology. Oil Drilling & Production Technology, 2013, 35(6):55-59(in Chinese with English abstract).
Wu Q, Xu Y, Zhang S L, et al. The core theories and key optimization designs of volume stimulation technology for unconventional reservoirs.
Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2014, 35(4):706-714(in Chinese with English abstract).
Wu X L, Gao B, Ye X, et al. Shale oil accumulation conditions and exploration potential of faulted basins in the east of China. Oil & Gas Geology,
2013, 34(4): 455-462(in Chinese with English abstract).
Yang H, Li S X, Liu X Y. Characteristics and resource prospects of tight oil
and shale oil in Ordos Basin. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2013, 34(1): 1-11(in
Chinese with English abstract).
Yu X H, Wang J Z, Liang J Q, et al. Depositional accumulation characteristics of gas hydrate in the northern continental slope of South China
Sea. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2014, 35(2): 253-264(in Chinese with English
abstract).

148

Zhang H F, Fang C L, Gao X Z, et al. Petroleum geology. Beijing: Petroleum
Industry Press, 1999(in Chinese).
Zhang H Z, He Y Q, Sun N D, et al. Natural gas hydrate production technology and outlook of its prospect. Petroleum Technology Forum, 2013,
32(6): 15-19(in Chinese with English abstract).
Zhang X M. Coalbed methane geology and resource evaluation in China.
Beijing: Science Press, 2002(in Chinese).
Zhao W Z, Dong D Z, Li J Z, et al. The resource potential and future status
in natural gas development of shale gas in China. Engineering Science,
2012, 14(7): 46-52(in Chinese with English abstract).
Zhao W Z, He D F, Fan T Z. The study on terminology, technological process and kernel content for petroleum system. Petroleum Exploration
and Development, 2002, 29(2):1-7(in Chinese with English abstract).
Zhao W Z,Wang Z Y, Wang H J, et al. Further discussion on the connotation and significance of the natural gas relaying generation model from
organic materials. Petroleum Exploration and Development, 2011,
38(2):129-135(in Chinese with English abstract).
Zhao X Z, Zhu J Q, Zhang R F, et al. Characteristics and exploration potential of tight calcilutite rudstone reservoirs in Shulu sag,Jizhong
depression,North China. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2014, 35(4): 613-622(in
Chinese with English abstract).
Zhao Z Z, Du J H. Tight oil & gas. Beijing: Petroleum Industry Press,
2012(in Chinese).
Zou C N, Dong D Z, Wang S J, et al. Geological characteristics, formation
mechanism and resource potential of shale gas in China. Petroleum
Exploration and Development, 2010, 37(6):641-653(in Chinese with
English abstract).
Zou C N, Tao S Z, Hou L H, et al. Unconventional petroleum geology. Beijing: Geological Publishing House, 2014(in Chinese).
Zou C N, Tao S Z, Hou L H, et al. Unconventional petroleum geology. 2nd
ed. Beijing: Geological Publishing House, 2013(in Chinese).
Zou C N, Yang Z, Cui J W, et al. Formation mechanism, geological characteristics and development strategy of nonmarine shale oil in China.
Petroleum Exploration and Development, 2013, 40(1):14-26(in Chinese
with English abstract).
Zou C N, Zhu R K, Wu S T, et al. Types, characteristics, genesis and prospects of conventional and unconventional hydrocarbon accumulations:
taking tight oil and tight gas in China as an instance. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2012, 33(2): 173-187(in Chinese with English abstract).

