Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

Some key issues on the unconventional
petroleum systems
Chengzao Jia1, Min Zheng2* and Yongfeng Zhang2
China National Petroleum Corporation, Beijing 100742, China
CNPC Research Institute of Petroleum Exploration and Development, Beijing 100083, China
Received June 15, 2016; Accepted August 18, 2016
1
2

Abstract: Oil and gas currently still hold a leading role in the global energy mix. The recent drastic
increase in unconventional oil and gas production contributes significantly to strike a balance
between the global demand and supply of oil and gas. However, a range of important fundamental
questions about the unconventional oil and gas resources have not been adequately answered. Little is
known about the distribution and accumulation patterns, as well as the exploration and development
characteristics of unconventional oil and gas. The current status of global oil and gas exploration
was reviewed and four key theoretical issues regarding the unconventional oil and gas geology were
identified: (1) the traditional concept and definition of “petroleum system” needs to be revisited. The
concept of a “holistic-process accumulation” model of a “total petroleum system” in petroliferous
basins was proposed to analyze the unconventional hydrocarbon accumulation mechanisms from four
key aspects of quantitative studies on hydrocarbon generation–expulsion–migration–accumulation
processes. (2) The second issue is related to fine-grained sedimentary system and sedimentary
facies of tight reservoirs. Through analyzing the relationship between fine-grained sediments and
unconventional hydrocarbon accumulation, three research integration areas were put forward. (3) The
third issue is on the micro-nano pore system and fluid phase behavior in shales and tight reservoirs.
Five aspects of micro-nano pore system were identified to focus on unconventional hydrocarbon
research, and the characteristics of micro-nano pore development and fluid phase behavior in
micro-nanopores were elucidated. (4) The fourth issue is related to unconventional hydrocarbon
accumulation patterns and resource evaluation. Based on the characteristics of unconventional
hydrocarbon accumulation, an evaluation system for unconventional hydrocarbon resources was
established and optimized.

Key words: energy consumption; unconventional hydrocarbons; exploration
status; petroleum system; tight reservoirs; micro-nano pore system

1 Introduction
Despite that global economic growth is slowing down, oil and
gas still dominate the energy consumption mix, crude oil account for 32.9% of the global energy total consumption, and
natural gas account for 23.8% of primary energy consumption
(BPC, 2016). As degree of the conventional oil and gas explora-

tion and development became more and more high, the unconventional oil and gas is regarded as a new resource to maintain
long-term stability of oil and gas supplies. In the past several
years, the main contribution to global oil and gas production
growth comes from the United States and Canada instead of the
OPEC countries. Indeed, the increment of oil and gas primarily
came from the tight oil, shale gas and deep sea oil and gas of the

* Corresponding author. Email: zhenmin@petrochina.com.cn

© 2017 Chinese Petroleum Society. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

113

C.Jia et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

United States, as well as the oil sands of Canada. In the next decade, the growth of global energy supply will mainly come from
tight oil, shale gas and oil sands, and till 2030, the net growth of
these three types of resources will account for 75% of the global
energy supply (BPC, 2011).
Technological innovation and productivity gains have unlocked
vast resources of the unconventional oil and gas. According to
the prediction of Energy Information Administration (EIA),
the global production of the unconventional gas is 822.7×109m3
in 2015, and will increase 2.48×1012m3 which accounts for 42%
of global total natural gas production, including shale gas production of 1.7×1012 m3, tight gas of 0.46× 1012 m3 and coalbed
methane of 0.32× 1012 m3; the global production of the unconventional oil is 4.8×10 8t in 2015, and will increase 10×10 8t
which accounts for 20% of global total crude oil production,
including tight oil production of 5.1×108 t and oil sand oil of 3.4×
108 t (EIA, 2016).
Although unconventional oil and gas have made a lot of progresses, many questions are still remained on the realistic significance of unconventional hydrocarbons and its sustainability as
a viable fuel supply. It was reported in the Investor Journal that
“the World Energy Outlook report of the International Energy
Agency (IEA) gives us the impression that we are swimming in
oil”. Due to the development of the unconventional hydrocarbon
resources, the once popular “peak oil” theory now merely becomes an irrelevant cultural concept (Hafez, 2013). A groundbreaking survey by the New York Times in 2011 revealed that
“although the oil industry in the United States has adopted an
extremely optimistic stance publically, it was skeptical about the
potential of the shale gas in private” (Hafez, 2013). The assessment is not entirely irrelevant, and the exploration success rate
of unconventional oil and gas with “continuous distribution” has
not been all that satisfactory, while rapid decline of the production in the exploitation stage of shale gas is an indisputable fact.
For example, the production of a shale gas well in the first year
would fall by 60% to 90%. However, for the energy industry, the
challenge is how to deal with the enormous transition at each
stage by developing suitable conceptual geological models and
enabling exploration and production (E & P) technology for
unconventional oil and gas. In order to more effectively explore
and exploit unconventional oil and gas resources and reduce
E&P risk, one must carefully analyzes the generation, expulsion, migration and accumulation patterns of unconventional oil
and gas, selects appropriate methods to evaluate unconventional
oil and gas resources, and objectively assesses the potential of
unconventional oil and gas resources. Accordingly, this study
identified four important theoretical issues relating to unconventional oil and gas development, i.e., (1) reexamining the
conventional “petroleum system” concept, (2) understanding the
fine-grained sedimentary system and tight reservoir sedimentology, (3) elucidating the micro-nano pore system and fluid phase

114

behavior in shale and tight reservoirs, (4) understanding the accumulation patterns of unconventional oil and gas and resource
potential.

2 Strategic status and development
restriction factor of unconventional oil and
gas
2.1 Huge potential of unconventional oil and gas in
global hydrocarbon exploration
2.1.1 Abundance and potential of unconventional oil and gas
resources for exploration and development
Global unconventional oil and gas resources are extremely rich
with huge potential for exploration and development. The total
unconventional oil recoverable resources is up to 620×109 t,
equivalent to the conventional oil resources, the unconventional
gas recoverable resources estimated to be 4000×1012 m3(BPC,
2016; CAPP, 2016; EIA, 2016). The ratio of unconventional and
conventional oil and gas resources was 8:2 (Zou et al., 2015).
In China, the unconventional oil resource is about 24×10 9 t,
unconventional gas resource is about 100×1012 m3, indicating a
tremendous development potential (Li et al., 2012). Industrial
development has been achieved for tight oil and gas, shale gas
and coalbed methane as important supplement to conventional
oil and gas, which will make more contributions to future oil and
gas supply. Thus exploration and development of unconventional
oil and gas has an important practical significance.
A decade ago, the inclusion of oil sands in Canada and heavy
oil in South America led to an increase in global oil reserves by
140×109 t, representing the first expansion of global oil and gas
resources. Tight oil and gas, shale gas, coalbed methane and
other unconventional oil and gas resources have been greatly
developed in the existing economic and technical conditions to
show huge resource potential, resulting in the second expansion
of global oil and gas resources. Taking the development of
unconventional gas in the United States as an example, the
development of shale gas and tight gas led to an increase in the
proven gas reserves in the U.S. from 5.0121×1012 m 3 in 2002
to 6.9376×1012 m 3 in 2008 with a growth rate of 38% (BPC,
2013). Reserve growth greatly expands the resource potential.
For example, unconventional gas resources are rich in China,
with unconventional gas geologic resources of 140×1012 to
230×1012 m3, and recoverable reserves of 35×1012 to 48×1012 m3,
accounting for about 75% of total gas resources (Jia et al., 2011a;
Jia et al, 2011b). This has greatly expanded the total resources in
China.
2.1.2 Steady increase of the proportion of unconventional oil
and gas production
With the development of production technology, especially

C.Jia et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

the application of horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing
technology, the production of unconventional oil and gas
resources has been increased consecutively with increasing
proportions of oil and gas production. The proportion of
unconventional oil and gas production occupies close to 10%
of the total oil and gas production, becoming an important
component of global oil and gas output. Such proportion will
become even larger in the future oil and gas supply. Variations
in gas production of the United States during 1949-2009 are
the most direct reflection of this trend of oil and gas resource
production structure. Gas production of the U.S. reached a
peak at 640×109 m 3 in 1973, then declined subsequently, and
amounted to 600×10 9 m 3 in 2009 (BPC, 2013). Since 1990,
although conventional gas production has declined annually,
total gas production is steady with growth, where contribution
of unconventional gas is undeniable. Unconventional gas
production exceeded 50% of the total gas production in 2009, of
which the proportions of tight gas, coalbed methane and shale
gas production were about 53%, 22% and 25%, respectively.

2.2 Some challenging geological issues around
unconventional oil and gas exploration
Unconventional oil and gas exploration and development become
extremely successful in the U.S., but the successful story failed
to be replicated by other countries and regions. Unconventional
oil and gas has complex geologic reservoiring conditions and
exploration development environment (Zou et al., 2012b), thus
great effort has to be made in the research on unconventional
oil and gas geological theories, resource evaluation and other
core technologies. Studies should be carried out on micro-nano
pore structures, fluid phase behavior and flow patterns, so as to
systematically investigate regional accumulation and distribution
patterns. In addition to solid fundamental geological research,
more attention should be paid to important basic theoretical
issues affecting the unconventional oil and gas development
such as: (1) revisiting the conventional “petroleum system”
model, (2) fine-grained sedimentary system and tight reservoir
sedimentology, (3) micro-nano pore systems and fluid phase
behavior in shale and tight reservoirs, (4) unconventional oil and
gas enrichment patterns and resource evaluation.

3 I mp or t a nt t he or e t i c a l i s s ue s of
unconventional oil and gas geology
It is often said that petroleum exists in the mind of oil explorers
first. As a new frontier in the exploration of oil and gas, the
exploration and development of unconventional hydrocarbons
needs new oil and gas accumulation theory as guidance.
The development of unconventional oil and gas changes the
conventional hydrocarbon prospecting idea and viewpoint from
the “trap” back to the “source”. Starting from the concept of
conventional petroleum system, the “petroleum system” for

the unconventional oil and gas has been further developed and
improved to include the study of the fine-grained sedimentary
system and tight reservoirs and identify micro-nanopores and
fluid phase behavior, so as to analyze the distribution and
enrichment patterns of the unconventional oil and gas and its
resource potential.

3.1 Refining the “petroleum system” concept
Since the Petroleum System concept was proposed by Dow in
1972 (Dow, 1972), a series of significant achievements have been
obtained in oil and gas exploration under the guidance of this
theory. As unconventional oil and gas resources have gradually
become the primary focus of the future oil and gas exploration
and development, the development conditions and exploration
characteristics add new meanings to the conventional petroleum
system. On one hand, through a holistic-process accumulation
research, the hydrocarbon reservoiring capacity of source rocks
will be revisited, on the other hand, hydrocarbon generation,
expulsion and retention potential of source rocks shall be
analyzed and studied to evaluate the mechanisms of in-source
and near-source hydrocarbon accumulation.
3.1.1 “Holistic-process accumulation” model of the “total
petroleum system” concept in a petroliferous basin
Petroleum system consists of a hydrocarbon kitchen and three
dimensional units involved in migration and accumulation of
the generated hydrocarbons (Zhao et al., 2012). Oil and gas
occurrence depends on different classes of geological spaces
and their internal factors, and the formation and distribution of
hydrocarbon reservoirs is a core issue of research in petroleum
system or compound (complex) petroleum system (Zhao, 2003).
The concept of “total petroleum system” emphasizes not only
the accumulated oil and gas resources through generation,
expulsion, migration, accumulation and preservation processes,
but also the oil and gas retained in the source rocks and filling
the near-source tight layers.
As the deepening of research on unconventional hydrocarbon
exploration and basic geological theory, oil and gas resources
display the “holistic-process accumulation” characteristics
of the total petroleum system from source rocks to enriched
accumulations. Shale oil and gas, tight oil and gas, oil sands and
other unconventional oil and gas plays expand the traditional
petroleum system concept, so as to extend the reservoiring types
of available and usable oil and gas resources to the immature
and low-mature source rock series, high-mature source rock
series, near-source tight sandstone and limestone rock series,
and near-surface rock series capturing the loss of crude oil and
etc. According to the different evolution stages of source rocks,
different types of oil and gas resources can be formed.
Immature or low-mature source rocks are extracted in the form

115

C.Jia et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

of solid shale mineral and carbonized at low temperature to
obtain shale oil. After oil and gas are expelled, the hydrocarbons
retained in the source rocks formed shale oil and gas. After
the primary migration, near-source oil and gas is charged
into tight sandstone or limestone to form tight oil and gas,
so that favorable traps are accumulated efficiently to develop
conventional oil and gas, or oil sand resources after oxidation
or biodegradation of oil and gas reservoirs. Therefore, the
traditional “petroleum system” should be revisited and studied
according to the “total petroleum system accumulation model”
based on the holistic-process of hydrocarbon evolution.
3.1.2 Quantitative research on process of hydrocarbon
generation-expulsion-migration-accumulation
Traditional oil and gas resource potential evaluation starts from
source rocks to use the quantity of hydrocarbons generated
and accumulation-to-primary-migration coefficient to obtain
the resource potential of oil and gas reservoirs at the end.
The resource accumulation of hydrocarbon reservoirs at the
end in the process of generation, expulsion, migration and
accumulation is particularly emphasized. However, quantitative
research on various stages of generation, expulsion, migration
and accumulation is ignored, so that the resource potential has
not been evaluated scientifically and properly. A more effective
approach should start from the hydrocarbon generation model,
refine the hydrocarbon evolution process, clarify quantitative
research at various stages of hydrocarbon generation, expulsion,
migration and accumulation, and carry out quantitative research
on the holistic-process of hydrocarbon generation, expulsion,
migration and accumulation (Jarvie et al., 2007; Jia, 2012;
Mahlstedt and Horsfield, 2012), so that resource evaluation will
be more scientific and realistic.
Advances in fundamental geological theory and analytical
technology for oil and gas enable the implementation of
quantitative research on the holistic-process of the hydrocarbon
generation, expulsion, m igration and accumulation. A
hydrocarbon generation and expulsion model under simulated
geological conditions (under the actions of temperature,
pressure, porosity, permeability, wettability and stress field) is
required to study the holistic-process from immaturity to highover maturity, and from residual hydrocarbons to migrated/
accumulated hydrocarbons and scattered hydrocarbons (Fig.
1), which involves four key issues: (1) hydrocarbon generating
potentials in three stages, i.e., primary cracking, secondary
cracking and high temperature cracking, (2) restoration of highover mature organic-matter hydrocarbon generation potential
and quantitative evaluation on hydrocarbon generation and
expulsion process, (3) gas generating potential evaluation for
scattered soluble organic matter and hydrocarbon generating
potential of limy oil source rocks, (4) quantitative evaluation on
the amount of retained hydrocarbons in the source rocks. The

116

holistic-process hydrocarbon generation– expulsion–migration–
accumulation model under geological conditions is used to guide
the oil and gas resource evaluation and increase the objectivity
of resource evaluation.
Content of original organic carbon (6.41%)
Content of organic
carbon of hydrocarbon
generation (2.32%)
Expulsed
carbon
content
(1.39%)

Expulsion
Gas
0.42%
Oil
0.97%

Residual organic carbon content
(4.09%)

Residual
carbon
content
(0.93%)

Residual

Oil cracking gas
0.31%
Residual organic carbon content
(4.09%)

0.28%
Residual carbon
0.34%

Residual organic carbon content
(4.43%)

Ro>2%
Oil expulsion
amount

Gas expulsion
amount

Reserved gas
volume

Potential
gas volume

Fig. 1 A whole-process modified model of hydrocarbon
generation and expulsion in the increasing high-temperature
pyrolysis (Mahlstedt and Horsfield, 2012)

3.1.3 Unconventional oil and gas accumulation mechanisms
In terms of hydrocarbon expulsion stages, unconventional oil
and gas can be divided into in-source retained shale oil and
gas, near-source charged tight oil and gas, or tight oil and gas
transported through secondary migration to tight conventional
reservoir. Unconventional oil and gas resources are within the
source rocks or in inter-bedded neighboring tight sandstone/
limestone. Tight reservoirs (including tight layers of mudstoneshale and tight layers of sandstone/limestone) provide oil and
gas reservoiring space in a unique way. A large amount of
unconventional oil and gas is “blocked” and “bounded” in tight
stratigraphic layers that were previously thought to have no oil
and gas reservoiring capability. In the source rocks at the high
thermal maturation stage, the development of organic pores can
compensate for the loss of inorganic pores. Deep tight reservoirs
can also undergo organic acid dissolution in the process of
hydrocarbon generation to produce pore-increasing effect, so
as to make up for the pore-reduction effect due to diagenetic
compaction and to improve the unconventional oil and gas
reservoiring ability.
Mudstone-shale pores consist mainly of three types, i.e.,
interparticle pores, organic-matter nanopores and dissolution
pores. Because of the development of organic pores, the source
rocks of mudstone-shale can provide storage space for shale oil
and gas enrichment and accumulation in the high-mature stage
(Fig. 2). It has been revealed that organic-matter nanopores
account for 31.74% of the total mudstone-shale pores but only
accounts for 1.8% of the rock volume on average (Guo et al.,
2013). In the source rock layers at a high thermal evolution

C.Jia et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

reduction from diagenetic compaction.

stage, organic pores compensate for the loss of inorganic pores.
Low-mature stage Oil window stage
R o /%

0.42

0.2

0.38 0.48

0.82 1.06 1.5

Type-II kerogen
Bitum

Increase of porosity

Kerogen

3.2 Fine-grained sedimentary system and tight
facies belt sedimentology

Shale gas window stage

en

Oil

2.8
Gas

Co kin g asp ha

lt

5.0

3.2.1 Definitions of fine-grained sedimentary system and
tight facies belt sedimentology

?

Fine-grained sediments refer to the sediments with 50% of
grain sizes less than 0.1 mm in diameter (Jiang et al., 2013).
These are composed mainly of clay and silty terrigenous clastic
particles, as well as a small number of endogenous basinal
carbonate, biological siliceous matter, and phosphate particles.
Fine-grained sediments can be divided into marine fine-grained
sedimentary system and lacustrine fine-grained sedimentary
system. Dimberline et al regarded that hemipelagic sediments
are a kind of layered fine-grained sediments dominated by silt
particles, which can be mixed with sandy or muddy turbidite
sediments (storm influence) or form independent sedimentary
facies, it was proposed that such hemipelagic fine-grained
layer is the result of alternating plankton flourish and silty
sand deposition (Dimberline et al., 1990), and such alternating
cycles may be formed yearly or quarterly (Fig. 3). Lemons and
Chan studied some lacustrine basin fine-grained sediments, and
concluded that lake level variations, tectonism, sedimentary
provenance and basin bedform may be the main factors
influencing the distribution of lacustrine basin fine-grained
sedimentary facies, of which basin bedform is the most critical
factor (Lemons and Chan, 1999).

Conversion from
kerogen to oil Organic pore
C om pa ct io
n
di ag en es isan d

Clay
Siliceous matter

Fig. 2 Correspondence between kerogen thermal evolution
stage and pore development in source rocks (Passey et al.,
2010)

The change in porosity of tight sandstone in the burial process
is not only associated with burial depth but is also affected by
sediment compositions, grain sizes, sorting, presence of early
cement, geothermal gradient, abnormal high pressure zones and
other factors (Liu et al., 2007). Dissolution is the key influential
factor for sandstone porosity development. Due to early dissolution,
secondary pores can be formed, dominated by interparticle pores
and intraparticle dissolution pores. A large number of interparticle
dissolution pores can also be developed due to the dissolution of
early cements by organic acids in the late hydrocarbon-generation
peak period (Liu et al., 2012). All the above pores play key roles of
pore-increasing effect for tight sandstone and make up for the poreTransition zone

In situ zone

H ig h d

e n s it y

Sedimentary zone

f lo w
Low density flow
Bathyal suspended matter

Chappel Limeatons
Tu

rbi

dit

Suspended matter

yc

urr

ent

Clay-rich facies

Spicule-rich facies
Rh yt hm ic m

ud sto ne fa ci
es
G ra de d m
ud st on e fa
ed -i n cl in
ci es
ed
M as siv e m ud
b ed d in g
sto ne fa ci es
fa ci es

C o rr u g at

Ordovician Ellenburger Group

Fig. 3

Depositional model of Barnett Shale in Ford Wards Basin, Texas, USA (Dimberline et al., 1990)

3.2.2 Combining fine-grained sedimentary investigation and
unconventional oil and gas evaluation
With exploration and development of global shale oil and gas as
well as tight oil and gas, fine-grained sedimentation has become
a frontier research area. In terms of unconventional oil and
gas exploration, fine-grained sediment research should focus
on the following three areas: (1) establishing the classification

scheme for fine-grained sedimentary system, and carrying out
research on tight sedimentary facies belt based on sedimentary
textures, structures, depositional environments, mineral and
chemical compositions; (2) studying the source-reservoir
configuration of fine-grained sedimentary system in terms of
favorable reservoiring conditions of unconventional oil and
gas, analysing single and mixed hydrocarbon accumulation
models, such as in-source type (shale oil and gas) of marine or

117

C.Jia et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

lacustrine mudstone-shale, near-source tight type (tight oil and
gas) and source-reservoir alternating type (tight and shale oil
and gas) of prodelta fine-grained sediments, and identifying
fine-grained sedimentary formation series with unconventional
oil and gas resource potential by enhancing the research on
fine-grained sediment and tight sedimentary facies belt; (3)
investigating the relationship between fine-grained sedimentary
system and conventional oil and gas reservoir system, and
making accurate assessment on whether an integrated research
and joint exploration and development should be carried out for
unconventional and conventional oil and gas.
The development condition of tight oil is a typical representative
of fine-grained sedimentary system, which requires both finegrained mudstone-shale source rock and tight sandstone or
limestone as reservoir sequences. As viewed from lacustrine
basin types and sedimentary environments, tight reservoirs in
close contact with major oil-generating rocks in China mainly
include three genetic types (Jia et al., 2012): (1) the saline
lacustrine carbonate sedimentary environment related to lake
salinization, where high-quality source rocks are interbedded
with carbonate-enriched reservoirs or gypsum-salt layers, and
the saline lacustrine carbonates are sandwiched in dark semideep lacustrine to deep lacustrine facies mudstone-shale,
forming superior tight oil accumulation conditions; (2) the deeplacustrine underwater prodelta sedimentary environment, which
is dominated by thin-layer silty fine-sand sediments transported
via delta front while satisfying the sedimentation of high-quality
argillaceous source rocks, so as to form interbed high-quality
source rocks and thin-layer silty fine sandstone or tight intervals
adjacent to or in close contact with the source-reservoir; (3) the
gravity-flow dominated sedimentary environment resulting from
the disturbance on deep-lacustrine depression or slope areas,
which is usually located at the centre of hydrocarbon generation
depression, and gravity-flow sediments come in direct contact
with source rocks.
The basic research on continental fine-grained sediment
system is presently insufficient, and there has been no unified
understanding on the genesis and distribution patterns of the
organic-rich shales. Therefore understanding the relationship
between sedimentary environment and organic matter is of great
benefit to the prediction and evaluation of shale (tight) oil and
gas resources.

3.3 Micro-nano pore system and fluid phase
behavior in shales and tight reservoirs
3.3.1 Research focus on micro-nano pore system and fluid
phase behavior
Unconventional oil and gas reservoirs are primarily dominated
by nanopore-throat system with local development of pores
at millimeter–micrometer scale. The identification of micro-

118

nano pore is not the purpose of unconventional reservoir study.
Instead, through the study of micro-nano pores and fluid phase
behavior, oil and gas storage space and mobility are to be
determined. The research focuses should include the following
five aspects: (1) the development condition and distribution
patterns of micro-nano pores in shales and tight reservoirs, (2)
the binding effect and adsorption properties of shales and tight
reservoirs on oil and gas, (3) the fluid phase behavior of micronanopores in shales and tight reservoirs, (4) the mechanism of
hydrocarbon charge and displacement for micro-nano pores, (5)
the connectivity and fluid phase behavior of micro-nano pores
for the purpose of determining the movable oil potential.
3.3.2 Characteristics of micro-nanopores
The micro-nano pore-throat system has a dominant pore
size range of 20-500 nm (Zou, 2013), of which the shale gas
reservoir, shale oil reservoir, tight limestone oil reservoir, tight
sandstone oil reservoir and tight sandstone gas reservoir have
pore size ranges of 5-200 nm, 30-400 nm, 40-500 nm, 50-900
nm and 40-700 nm, respectively. Reservoir characterisation
shows that the nano pore-throats with a diameter less than
1 μm account for more than 80% of reservoiring space, and
micropores account for 5%–20% (Zou, 2013).
Unconventional oil and gas reservoir pore types include
primary interparticle pores, intercrystalline pores, interparticle
dissolution pores, intraparticle pores and organic pores.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies show that
interparticle dissolution pores and primary interparticle pores
are important spaces for oil in tight sandstone, tight limestone
and other unconventional reservoirs (Zou et al., 2009b). As
important channels for shale gas occurrence and seepage,
organic pores play a key role in determining the gas content
of shale reservoir. The development or absence of organic
pores in shales determines whether shale gas can be developed
commercially and viably (Zou, 2013).
Shale pore types include interparticle dissolution pores, clay
interlayer micropores, particle dissolution pores, dissolution
intramatrix pores, intraparticle dissolution pores and organic
pores. Pore size is generally of micron range, and organic pore
throats are normally 100-200 nm with large specific surface
areas and complex structures. Shales with low-medium thermal
maturity contain inorganic interparticle and intraparticle pores,
while shales with high thermal maturity consist primarily of
organic nanopores. The increase of organic pores generated in
the high thermal evolution stage largely makes up for the loss
of inorganic pores during the compaction and diagenesis stage
(Fig. 4) (Cander, 2012). Organic nanopores of mudstone-shale in
the Weiyuan and Changning, Sichuan Basin, account for 31.74%
of the total pores in mudstone-shale, equivalent to 1.8% of rock
volume on average (Guo et al., 2013).

C.Jia et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

3.3.3 Fluid phase behavior in micro-nanopores
Micro-nanopores govern hydrocarbon accumulation modes and
fluid phase behaviors. In millimeter pores (with pore-throat
diameter greater than 1 mm) and above, fluids can flow freely
to form a “pipe flow”, where oil and gas mostly occurs in a free
state in the connected pores and fractures, obeying the law of
hydrostatics. In micro pores (with pore-throat diameter of 1
mm-1 μm), the capillary resistance restricts the free flow of fluid
and forms “seepage”, obeying the Darcy Law of seepage. In
nanopore throats (with the pore-throat diameter less than 1μm),
there are strong viscous force and molecular force between fluid
and the surrounding medium, where oil and gas is adsorbed
in adsorbed state on the surface of minerals and kerogen or
adsorbed in a diffusion state to the internal solid organic matter.
0.01
0

Porosity
0.1

1

0.5
1.0

Depth/km

1.5

Inorganic pore

2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5

Organic pore

4.0
4.5
5.0

Fig. 4 Development and evolution model of inorganic and
organic pores in shales

Effective migration phases of gas include water soluble phase,
oil soluble phase, free phase and diffusion phase. As three major
types of unconventional natural gases, tight gas, shale gas and
coalbed methane are stored in the reservoirs under different
modes, due primarily to the difference in organic matter
content. In tight sandstone, organic matter content is low and
the gas occurs in pores as a free phase. In shales, organic matter
content is moderate and organic pores are abundant, thus the
gas occurrence state is more complex: usually with 20%-85%
adsorbed to kerogen or clay particles, and 25%-30% in a free
state filling fractures or interparticle pores, and minor amount
dissolved in kerogen, bitumen and water. In coal seams, organic
matter content is very high, and coalbed methane mainly occurs
in absorbed state in micropores of coal. The presence of water
in shale reservoirs has some adverse impacts on shale reservoir
storage capability, because the water molecule film can greatly
reduce the adsorption ability of clay minerals. In nanopores,

there are great viscous force and molecular force between
fluid and surrounding medium, where fluid can hardly flow
freely under general condition and can thus be retented. When
temperature and pressure condition changes, diffusion only
occurs in the state of molecules or molecular groups (Zou et al.,
2012a), and oil and gas in the nanopores is just “migration” in
such states.

3.4 Enrichment patterns and resource evaluation
of unconventional oil and gas
3.4.1 Enrichment patterns of unconventional oil and gas
Unconventional oil and gas reservoirs are also known as
“continuous” oil and gas reservoirs in the early days, which
vividly illustrate the occurrence state of unconventional oil and
gas and at the same time gives an impression of widespread
occurrence of oil and gas. As viewed from exploration practices
for the unconventional oil and gas, such as shale gas in the
Longmaxi Formation in the southern Sichuan, tight oil in the
Chang-7 Member of the Yanchang Formation in the Ordos
Basin, tight oil in the Lucaogou Formation, Jimusar Depression,
Junggar Basin, tight oil in the Qingshankou Formation,
Songliao Basin, and tight gas in the Sulige Field, Ordos Basin,
unconventional oil and gas may exist in association with bottom
water, top water, side water, or exhibit oil-water differentiation or
intercalation, or shows slope-controlled continuous distribution
(Zou et al., 2009a). This may be also manifested as structurally
controlled local enrichment, which is not continuous in a
narrow sense. Overall, unconventional oil and gas enrichment is
primarily controlled by the following four factors:
(1) Sedimentary configuration of the prototype basins: the
tectono-sedimentary characteristics of prototype basins not
only affect the development and distribution of source rocks
and reservoir units, but also have an overwhelming control
over the hydrocarbon generation and expulsion processes of
the source rocks, the formation of favorable migration conduit
systems, and the development of pore–fracture network system.
A comprehensive understanding of the characteristics of the
prototype basin is thus a pre-requisite for effective oil and gas
exploration.
(2) Concentrated development zones of high-quality source
rocks: the development of unconventional oil and gas resources
have more stringent requirements for organic matter types,
abundance and maturity characteristics. According to the lower
limits of organic carbon content (e.g. 1%, 1%-2% or > 2%),
source rocks can be divided into three categories. The highquality source rock zones with organic carbon content over 2%
are the realistic areas for unconventional oil and gas exploration
and development, while the rest two categories have potential to
be developed for unconventional oil and gas.

119

C.Jia et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

(3) Large-scale development of reservoir sweet spots: the
continuous distribution of unconventional oil and gas is
characterized by extensive (diffusive) distribution, and the
oil and gas show higher enrichment extent in reservoir sweetspot zones and their peripherals, whereas elsewhere oil and
gas is mostly scattered in irregular distribution. Therefore, the
identification and development of sweet-spot zone governs the
commercial development value of unconventional oil and gas
resources.
(4) Moderately preservation conditions: the lithology and pore
development characteristics of unconventional oil and gas
reservoirs have a strong binding force to oil and gas and can
lead to huge variations in hydrocarbon charge and accumulation
along with high risk of destruction and loss. The strict “trap,
migration and preservation” conditions required for conventional
oil and gas have little significance for unconventional oil and
gas reservoirs. Due to their unique accumulation characteristics,
unconventional oil and gas resources are not prone to damage
by external factors. Once accumulated, unconventional oil
and gas can be easily preserved, which also determines the
characteristics of extensive distribution of unconventional oil
and gas resources.
3.4.2 Evaluation of unconventional oil and gas resources
As the exploration and development of unconventional oil and
gas characterized by huge challenge, rapid production decline
and relatively small production per well, recoverablity and
profitability of resources have to be emphasized in its evaluation.
This include: (1) recoverable resource evaluation must be

emphasized, and objective evaluation of Estimated Ultimate
Recovery (EUR) should rely on mature production area and
production well data; (2) it requires to carry out comprehensive
evaluation of the favorable zones, prototype basin analysis,
source rocks, stable tectonic region and preservation condition,
as well as surface engineering construction conditions; (3)
geophysical data should be used to differentiate shale facies,
predict the spatial distribution of organic-rich shale facies and
brittle shale facies; (4) geological and engineering conditions
need to be considered for comprehensive prediction of “sweet
spots” and their distribution under given engineering conditions;
(5) favorable optimization parameters and standard are to be
established.
Due to the varieties of unconventional oil and gas resources and
their diverse geological characteristics, no single unified method
can be directly used for resource evaluation. Suitable evaluation
methods should thus be optimized according to the specific
characteristics of the unconventional oil and gas resources.
Several evaluation methods were developed in China and
elsewhere as summarized in Guo et al. (Guo et al., 2011). Coalbed
methane, gas hydrate, oil shale and oil sands are mainly evaluated
by volume method. For the tight sandstone gas, tight oil, and
shale oil and gas resources, the evaluation methods used are quite
different in China and elsewhere. Analogy method and genetic
method are usually used in China, while the analogy method
and statistical method are often used elsewhere. In terms of the
analogy method, the resource abundance analogy method is more
often used in China, while the FORSPAN method (Schmoker,
1999) and its variations are more often used elsewhere (Table 1).

Table 1 Optimization of unconventional oil and gas resource evaluation methods
Resource
type

China

Overseas

Tight
sandstone
gas

Delphi method, geological analogy method, residual resource
analysis method, accumulation-dispersion balance calculation
method, formation-fluid abnormal pressure recovery method,
accumulation condition analysis and prediction method, basin
simulation method, sweet-spot scale sequence model method of
deep-basin gas reservoir, volume method

FORSPAN method (USGS analogy method), resource
network density method (ExxonMobile analogy
method), stochastic simulation method, singlewell reserve estimation method, statistical method
(discovery process method and spatial resource
distribution and prediction method)

Tight oil

Graded resource abundance analogy method, EUR analogy
method, small surface element method (volume method) and
basin simulation method

FORSPAN method, small surface element method

Shale gas

Resource abundance analogy method, EUR analogy method,
volume method, adsorption method of unit rock gas

USGS analogy method, single-well reserves estimation
method

Volume method

Volume method, analogy method

Volume method

Volume method

Oil shale

Volume method, pyrolysis simulation method

Volume method, spatial resource distribution and
prediction method

Oil sands

Volume method

Volume method

Coalbed
Methane
Gas
hydrate

120

Unconventional oil and gas resource evaluation methods

C.Jia et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

4 Conclusions
The exploration and development of unconventional oil and
gas shows a good development momentum. Some acute issues
were encountered in the exploration and development practices
of unconventional oil and gas, such as great difficulty in
exploration and development, relatively high investment, single
well rapid production decline and relatively small production
per well. For example, the output of a shale gas well can fall by
60%-90% in the first year of production. From the perspective
of unconventional oil and gas accumulation and distributionenrichment patterns, four important theoretical issues were
identified:
(1) The concept of “petroleum system” was further elucidated.
The adoption of a holistic-process accumulation model
of total petroleum system highlighted the possibility and
the objectivity of predicting the distribution in generation,
expulsion, accumulation and dispersion of hydrocarbons. In
the holistic-process hydrocarbon generation and expulsion
model, three stages were recognised, i.e., primary cracking,
secondary cracking and high-temperature cracking, and their
hydrocarbon generation potentials were evaluated. Hydrocarbon
generation and expulsion quantities were adopted to constrain
the evaluation of related conventional oil and gas resources.
Based on the accumulation mechanisms, unconventional oil and
gas accumulation models were categorised as in-source retained
shale oil and gas, near-source charged tight oil and gas, or tight
oil and gas transported via secondary migration to conventional
reservoirs.
(2) The research on fine-grained sedimentation and tight
reservoirs was emphasized. Three issues were identified from the
perspective of fine-grained sedimentation and unconventional
oil and gas exploration, including the classification scheme, the
source-reservoir configurations of fine-grained sedimentary
system, and the integrated research and exploration of finegrained sedimentary system.
(3) M icro -na no pores a re t he ma i n storage spaces of
unconventional oil and gas reservoirs. Nanopore-throats
with diameters less than 1 μm account for over 80% in most
reservoirs, whereas micropores only account for 5%–20%.
Micro-nanopores govern hydrocarbon accumulation models and
fluid phase behaviors. Due to these characteristics, micro-nano
pore research should focus on the micro-nano pore development
and distribution patterns, oil and gas adsorption properties of
micro-nano pores, fluid phase behavior in pores, hydrocarbon
charge and migration mechanisms, and movable oil potential
evaluation.
(4) Multiple factors shall be taken into account comprehensively
in the research of unconventional oil and gas enrichment patterns

and resource evaluation. Unconventional oil and gas distribution
is complex, and its enrichment patterns are controlled by four
major factors, i.e., the tectonic-sedimentary configuration of
the prototype basin, concentrated development area of highquality source rocks, the conditions for large-scale development
and preservation of reservoir sweet spots. The distribution and
enrichment patterns of unconventional oil and gas should be
investigated comprehensively including unconventional oil and
gas from geological evaluation, geophysical data, development
data, parameter criteria, method optimization and other aspects,
so as to objectively evaluate the recoverable resources.

Acknowledegments
This work was funded by National Science and Technology
Major Project (2011ZX05043), CNPC Major Science and
Technology Project (2013E0502) and Innovation Project of
PetroChina Research Institute of Exploration and Development
(2012Y006).

References
British Petroleum Company (BPC) .BP statistical review of world energy
2013. London: British Petroleum Company, 2013.
British Petroleum Company (BPC). BP energy outlook 2030. London:British
Petroleum Company, 2011.
British Petroleum Company (BPC). BP statistical review of world energy
2016. London: British Petroleum Company, 2016
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers(CAPP). Statistical handbook
for Canada’s upstream petroleum industry. Calgary: Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, 2016.
Cander H. Sweet spots in shale gas and liquids plays:prediction of fluid composition and reservoir pressure. California: 2012 AAPG Annaul Meeting, 2012.
Dimberline A J, Bell A, Woodcock N H. A laminated hemipelagic facies
from the Wenlock and Ludlow of the Welsh Basin. Journal of the Geological Society, 1990, 147: 693-701.
Dow W G. Application of oil correlation and source rock data to exploration
in Williston Basin (abs.). AAPG Bulletin, 1972, 56: 615.
Guo Q L, Chen X M, Song H Q, et al. Evolution and models of shale porosity during burial process. Natural Gas Geoscience, 2013, 24(3): 439-449
(in Chinese with English abstract).
Guo Q L, Zhou C Q, Chen N S, et al. Evaluation methods for unconventional
hydrocarbon resources. Lithologic Reservoirs, 2011, 23(4): 12-19 (in
Chinese with English abstract).
Hafez. A . Shale gas “hoax”. Investor Journal, 2013, (3). http: www.qikan.
com.cn/Article/tzzb/tzzb201303.
Jarvie D M, Hill R J, Ruble T E, et al. Unconventional shale gas systems:
the Mississippian Barnett shale of north central Texas as one model for
thermogenic shale gas assessment. AAPG Bulletin, 2007, 91(4): 475499.
Jia C Z, Li J Z, Chang Y W, et al. The large oil and gas fields and coal bed
gas exploration and exploitation technology development strategy of
China (2008ZX05043). Beijing: CNPC Science and Technology Research Institute, 2011a.

121

C.Jia et al./Petroleum Research (2016) 2,113-122

Jia C Z, Li J Z, Zheng M, et al. China’s oil and gas exploration and development theory achievement and the new generation of integrated theory
(2008ZX05043-002). Beijing: CNPC Science and Technology Research
Institute, 2011b.
Jia C Z, Zou C N, Li J Z, et al. Evaluation criteria,major types,characteristics,
and resource prospects of tight oil in China. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2012,
33(3): 343-350 (in Chinese with English abstract).
Jia C Z. Several important issues about current oil and gas exploration in
China. Acta Petrolei Sinica, 2012, 33(S1): 6-13 (in Chinese with English
abstract).
Jiang Z X, Liang C, Wu J, et al. Several issues in sedimentological studies
on hydrocarbon bearing fine grained sedimentary rocks. Acta Petrolei
Sinica, 2013, 34(6): 1031-1039 (in Chinese with English abstract).
Lemons D R, Chan M A. Facies architecture and sequence stratigraphy of
fine grained lacustrine deltas along the eastern margin of Late Pleistocene Lake Bonneville, northern Utah and southern Idaho. AAPG Bulletin, 1999, 83(4): 635-665.
Li J Z, Zheng M, Zhang G S, et al. Potential and prospects of conventional
and unconventional natural gas resource in China. Acta Petrolei Sinica,
2012, 33(S1): 89-98 (in Chinese with English abstract).
Liu H, Peng J, Li L J, et al. Characteristics and controlling factors of calcarenaceous sandstone reservoir in the middle part of western Sichuan Basin. Lithologic Reservoirs, 2012, 24(2): 77-82 (in Chinese with English
abstract).
Liu Z, Shao X J, Jin B, et al. Coeffect of depth and burial time on the evolution of porosity for classic rocks during the stage of compaction. Geoscience, 2007, 21(1): 125-132 (in Chinese with English abstract).
Mahlstedt N, Horsfield B. Metagenetic methane generation in gas shales
I:screening protocols using immature samples. Marine and Petroleum
Geology, 2012, 31(1): 27-42.
Passey Q R, Bohacs K M, Esch W L, et al. From oil prone source rock to gas
producing shale reservoir: geologic and petrophysical characterization

122

of unconventional shale gas reservoirs.SPE 131350, 2010.
Schmoker J W. U.S.geological survey assessment model for continuous
(unconventional) oil and gas accumulations: the “FORSPAN” model.
U.S.Geological Survey Bulletin, 1999, 2168: 1-9.
U. S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). International energy outlook 2016. Washington: U. S. Energy Information Administration, 2016.
Zhao W Z, He D F, Fan S Z. The study on terminology,technological process and kernel content for petroleum system. Petroleum Exploration
and Development, 2012, 29(2): 1-7 (in Chinese with English abstract).
Zhao W Z. The features of petroleum systems in superimposed sedimentary
basins of China and their evaluation methodology. Beijing: Science
Press, 2003: 1-117 (in Chinese).
Zou C N, Tao S Z, Yang Z, et al. New advance in unconventional petroleum
exploration and research in China. Bulletin of Mineralogy,Petrology and
Geochemistry, 2012a, 31(4): 313-322 (in Chinese with English abstract).
Zou C N, Tao S Z, Yuan X J, et al. Global importance of “continuous” petroleum reservoirs: accumulation, distribution and evaluation. Petroleum
Exploration and Development, 2009a, 36(6): 669-682 (in Chinese with
English abstract).
Zou C N, Tao S Z, Yuan X J, et al. The formation conditions and distribution
characteristics of continuous petroleum accumulations. Acta Petrolei
Sinica, 2009b, 30(3): 324-331 (in Chinese with English abstract).
Zou C N, Zhai G M, Zhang G Y, et al. Formation, distribution , potential
and prediction of global conventional and unconventional hydrocarbon
resoures. Petroleum Exploration and Development, 2015, 42(13): 13-25
(in Chinese with English abstract).
Zou C N, Zhu R K, Wu S T, et al. Types,characteristics,genesis and prospects
of conventional and unconventional hydrocarbon accumulations:taking
tight oil and tight gas in China as an instance. Acta Petrolei Sinica,
2012b, 33(2): 173-187 (in Chinese with English abstract).
Zou C N. Unconventional oil and gas geology. Beijing: Geological
Publishing House, 2013, 1-91 (in Chinese).

