e22 Book Reviews

Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/optvissci by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 10/31/2020

or for those looking for a succinct summary of the topic.
The book provides high-quality detailed photographs of an extensive range
of conditions. In total, there are in excess
of 1250 color images. Each image has a
caption with succinct and relevant information. Of course, the level of detail is
limited, and it is expected that readers
would need to consult traditional textbooks if they require a more detailed
description of any particular condition.
This current edition of the book has
been updated to include online access to
its contents and images, which is an
update that will, without doubt, be highly
valued by readers. The online content is
readily available using an access code
included in the book. Most importantly,
all materials can be searched electronically
and images are easily enlarged for clear
viewing.
Both the book and its online version
include a comprehensive table of contents
and an index, so that all conditions can be
located and viewed quickly and easily.
Overall, this is an exceptionally wellproduced book. It would be a valuable
study guide for students, and it would be
a valuable easily accessible resource for
both new and experienced clinicians. It
is a book that I highly recommend.

Leo G. Carney
Brisbane, Australia

Clinical Procedures in Primary Eye
Care, 4th ed., David B. Elliott.

Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2013.
$62.96
This book, written by Professor Elliott
and his coauthors, was written primarily
for students in the optometry professional
program and those practitioners wishing
to review their clinical practice. This book
contains nine chapters that describe, in
large part, the elements of the comprehensive eye examination.
Chapter 1 is unique in that it discusses
evidence-based optometry and how clinical tests and procedures are assessed and
critiqued in the research literature. This is
a topic that will be of increasing importance in the future as clinical practice
guidelines and other sources of information incorporate evidenced-based literature in their publications. Clearly, evaluating
the usefulness of optometric techniques
or procedures and analyzing clinical comparison studies of these techniques or
procedures are of great interest to the
student and practitioner. This chapter also
includes a very nice section on primary eye
care examination formats.
Chapter 2 discusses communication skills
and all of this aspect germane to patient
satisfaction. This chapter includes such

topics as turning the anxious patient into
a satisfied patient, patient history and
recording, discussion and recording of the
diagnoses and management plan, patient
information, and the referral letter or
report. Each of these topics is of importance in providing information to the
patient but also protecting the clinician.
The next four chapters specifically
discuss aspects of the comprehensive eye
examination. Chapter 3 discusses the
assessment of visual function and includes
visual acuity measurement, methods of
visual field assessment, color vision testing,
contrast sensitivity and disability glare
testing, and assessment of macular function. Chapter 4 describes the many techniques and procedures related to refraction
and prescribing. This chapter provides a
very comprehensive discussion of objective
and subjective refraction procedures,
cycloplegic refraction, determining the
reading addition, and the philosophy of
prescribing. Chapter 5 discusses all of the
many issues related to contact lens assessment. Chapter 6 is an in-depth description
of the assessment of binocular vision and
accommodation. It includes the many
aspects related to the measurement of
heterophoria, fixation disparity, convergence, accommodation, stereopsis, ocular
mobility, and eye movement.
The final three chapters are related to
the assessment of health and include
ocular health, variations in appearance of
the normal eye, and physical examination
procedures.
The chapters are well organized, the
tables and figures are very useful, and
the references are complete. Some chapters, especially Chapter 4, uses excellent
colored images of various ocular conditions. This book certainly attains its goals
as set out in the Preface and would be
recommended to optometry students,
residents, or practitioners wishing to
review their clinical practice.
John F. Amos
Birmingham, Alabama

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2014

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

