1040-5488/15/9209-e233/0 VOL. 92, NO. 9, PP. e233Ye240
OPTOMETRY AND VISION SCIENCE
Copyright * 2015 American Academy of Optometry

CLINICAL REPORT

Corneal Neuralgia after LASIK
Christos Theophanous*, Deborah S. Jacobs†, and Pedram Hamrah†
Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/optvissci by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdgGj2MwlZLeI= on 10/31/2020

ABSTRACT
Purpose. To illustrate that corneal neuralgia may be the basis for refractory dry eye syndrome after laser-assisted in situ
keratomileusis (LASIK).
Methods. The methodology used is that of a retrospective medical record review of a small case series.
Results. Three male patients, aged 30 to 48 years, referred in 2012 for dry eye syndrome refractory to treatment within
1 year of LASIK or LASIK enhancement are reported. Each patient gave history of eye pain, light sensitivity, and difficulty with
visual activities beginning within 2 months of LASIK or LASIK enhancement. Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/15 or 20/20
in each of the six eyes. Tear-centered models and metrics did not explain persistent symptoms, which was consistent with
inadequate response to standard dry eye treatments used before referral and reported here. In vivo confocal microscopy was
abnormal at presentation in each case and was followed over time. Treatments undertaken subsequent to referral included
autologous serum tears (three cases), PROSE (Prosthetic Replacement of the Ocular Surface Ecosystem) treatment (two
cases), and systemic agents for pain, anxiety, or depression (three cases). By the end of 2013, at a mean of 23 months after
LASIK or LASIK enhancement, symptoms improved in all three patients.
Conclusions. Patients with persistent dry eye symptoms out of proportion to clinical signs after LASIK have a syndrome that
may best be classified as corneal neuralgia. In vivo confocal microscopy can be informative as to the neuropathic basis of
this condition. In keeping with current understanding of complex regional pain syndrome, early multimodal treatment
directed toward reducing peripheral nociceptive signaling is warranted to avoid subsequent centralization and persistence
of pain. Distinguishing this syndrome from typical post-LASIK dry eye remains a challenge.
(Optom Vis Sci 2015;92:e233Ye240)
Key Words: dry eye, dry eye syndrome, LASIK, corneal neuralgia, neuropathic pain

A

lthough laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) is
a common and highly effective surgical treatment of
myopia,1Y3 dry eye symptoms are reported by nearly half
of patients after the procedure.4Y6 Several pathophysiological
mechanisms have been suggested for these symptoms, mostly
relating to impaired tear production, distribution, and stability.7
In particular, transection of sensory nerves during the lamellar cut
of the procedure is thought to impair the blink reflex and alter
corneal sensation.8Y10 Alterations in corneal topography causing uneven tear distribution8 and postoperative changes in tear
composition owing to goblet cell damage11,12 are also thought
*BA
†
MD
Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California (CT); Boston Foundation for Sight, Needham, Massachusetts (DSJ);
and Cornea & Refractive Surgery Service, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Department
of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts (DSJ, PH).
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0 (CCBY-NCND), where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly
cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially.

to be contributing factors. Typically, these symptoms peak between 1 week and 3 months of surgery10,13Y15 and resolve within
6 months.10,15 This time course maps closely with the recovery of
central corneal sensation13,15 and a period of rapid corneal nerve
density recovery between 6 months and 1 year after surgery.16,17
This tear-centered model fails to explain the full spectrum of
LASIK-associated dry eye disease. Studies have confirmed a poor
correlation between symptoms and clinical signs, such as punctate
epithelial keratopathy on corneal staining and abnormal Schirmer
tests in LASIK patients,9,18 and in dry eye patients in general.19
Patients with normal findings may report severe symptoms,18
whereas patients with visible epithelial changes after LASIK often
do not report discomfort.4
An explanation for these inconsistencies is that certain cases of
intractable LASIK-associated dry eye disease represent a pathologic process of the nervous system rather than a problem of tear
dynamics.20,21 Neuralgia is defined as pain in the distribution of a
nerve or set of nerves with concurrent signs of nerve damage.22
Intractable dry eye syndrome after LASIK might be considered a
variant of complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) type II23 and
may be better described as post-LASIK neuralgia. A neuropathic

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 9, September 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

e234 Corneal Neuralgia after LASIKVTheophanous et al.

basis for persistent, intractable, and disabling symptoms out of
proportion to clinical signs in a subset of patients after LASIK is
plausible given the known nerve injury from the procedure. Because the corneal subbasal nerve plexus (SNP) is not visualized
with the slit lamp, in vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM) can be
useful in identifying signs of nerve damage. A recent report on
correlation of symptoms and signs of dry eye disease in patients
with meibomian gland disease found that there was only correlation in patients without abnormalities of the SNP.24 Injury to
the SNP of the type that occurs in LASIK may disrupt the correlation between signs and symptoms.
We report the presentation, treatment, and course of disease of
three patients referred in 2012 for dry eye syndrome refractory to
treatment within 1 year of LASIK or LASIK enhancement. We
explain that a subset of patients with severe and persistent ocular
symptoms after LASIK may be better understood and treated as
corneal neuralgia.

METHODS
Our methodology is that of a retrospective medical record review. This report was approved as exempt from review by the
Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee of Massachusetts
Eye and Ear (MEE) and by the New England Institutional Review
Board; this study complied with the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act and adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Inclusion criteria for this study included
LASIK performed within 1 year of initial consultation in 2012 and
persistent ocular symptoms that were not alleviated with conventional dry eye therapy. Data extracted from the medical records
included patient demographics, medical history, ocular history,
previous treatment, Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI) scores,25
best-corrected visual acuity, clinical findings including vital dye
staining and tear metrics, and IVCM imaging using HRT3/Rostock
Cornea Module (Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Heidelberg,
Germany), as well as clinical course through December 2013.

RESULTS
The three patients included in this report are male with ages
between 30 and 48 years. Demographic and clinical information
is summarized in Table 1. Detailed case histories with a mean
follow-up of 23 months after LASIK or LASIK enhancement are
as follows.

Case 1
A 42-year-old man with a history of hypercholesterolemia
underwent LASIK OU. He presented to Boston Foundation for
Sight (BFS) 10 months later with a detailed timeline of his own
clinical course as follows: Immediately after the procedure, he had
a burning sensation in both eyes. Within several weeks, he had
noted symptoms of light sensitivity, halo effect, and extreme dry
eye. He was initially treated with topical cyclosporine (Restasis,
Allergan, Irvine, CA) twice per day, preservative-free lubricating
drops throughout the day, and punctal occlusion. These measures

substantially reduced his symptoms in the left eye by 2 to
3 months after LASIK; symptoms in the right eye persisted with
notation of continued achy, sore pain with tearing that worsened
throughout the day, sensitivity to sunlight, blurriness, and dryness. His symptoms in the right eye were subsequently treated
with warm compresses twice per day, moisture chamber goggles during the day, ointment thrice per day and nightly, oral
cetirizine, trial of bandage soft lenses, and a daytime eye patch,
offering limited relief. Doxycycline 100 mg by mouth daily was
also prescribed for mild blepharitis. During this treatment period, the patient developed depression and ultimately was hospitalized for suicidal ideation, which he reported was driven by
his eye pain.
At presentation to BFS, his best-corrected visual acuity was
20/20 OD and 20/15 OS. His OSDI score was 54.5 (average
subgroup scores: A = 1.4, B = 3.0, C = 2.7). Oxford scores26 were
0 in each eye. Current and prior systemic and local therapies are
listed in Table 1. The patient reported relief of symptoms with
trial of a Prosthetic Replacement of the Ocular Surface Ecosystem
(PROSE) device (BFS, Needham, MA) in the right eye only;
hence, the decision was made to proceed with PROSE treatment
for that eye alone, with the suggestion that he continues all other
modes of treatment of his symptoms. A trial of autologous serum
tears (AST) was suggested and consultation at MEE for corneal
imaging was recommended.
He was evaluated at MEE 2 weeks later, 4 days after initiation
of AST four times per day by his primary eye care provider. Examination was significant for mild superficial punctate keratitis
(SPK) OD and large central and inferior SPK OS. Meibomian
gland dysfunction OU was noted. Tear breakup time (TBUT)
was 2 seconds OU, and tear osmolarity was 296 mOsm/L OD
and 289 mOsm/L OS. Schirmer test results with anesthesia were
6 mm OD and 10 mm OS. No pain score was obtained, but he
reported total resolution with in-office administration of topical
proparacaine. In vivo confocal microscopy of his right eye demonstrated significant diminishment of his corneal nerves with very
few nerves present, increased tortuosity, beading, and increased
presence of immune dendritic cells. In vivo confocal microscopy of
the left eye showed no nerves in the central cornea and increased
presence of immune dendritic cells (Fig. 1). Increased frequency
to eight times per day and an increased concentration of AST
were prescribed, and loteprednol one drop daily was added to his
regimen to suppress inflammation.
The patient returned for follow-up 2 months later, having been
hospitalized again for depression. There had been addition and
discontinuation of systemic medications by his other physicians,
including introduction of gabapentin and carbamazepine. He was
not using loteprednol. Administration of topical proparacaine at
this visit significantly diminished but did not eliminate his pain.
He was advised to resume suppressive loteprednol. At his next visit
2 months later, he had discontinued wearing the PROSE device
and was continuing with AST, and his systemic regimen had been
further adjusted. He reported that his pain was 3 of 10, having
improved from what he reported retrospectively as 7 of 10. There
was evidence of SNP regeneration on IVCM OU.
Eight months from initial consultation, the patient returned
for a scheduled 3-month follow-up reporting flare-ups of pain as
high as 8 of 10 from a baseline of 4 of 10 with stinging, tearing,

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 9, September 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Corneal Neuralgia after LASIKVTheophanous et al.

e235

TABLE 1.
Patient demographics and clinical features

Age,
Case y/sex
1

2

Medical history
before LASIK

42/M Hypercholesterolemia

48/M Anxiety
Allergic rhinitis

Visual
acuity
OD: 20/20
OS: 20/15

OD: 20/15
OS: 20/15

Vital dye
staining
OSDI
(Oxford
(A, B, C)* scale)†
54.5 (1.4,
3.0, 2.7)

47.7 (1.2,
3.0, 1.5)

OD: 0
OS: 0

OD: 0
OS: 0

Gastroesophageal
reflux disease

3

30/M (None)

OD: 20/15
OS: 20/15

39.6 (1.8,
2.5, 0)

OD: 1+
OS: 0

Tear metrics
(OD, OS)
(mo after
surgery)

Prescribed
ophthalmologic
treatments

Systemic
medications at
presentation

Lubricant drops
Lubricant
ointment
5, 5 (21)
Punctal occlusion
Schirmer, mm: Moisture goggles
6, 10 (11)
Topical
antibiotics
Tear osmolarity, Topical steroids
mOsm/L:
Topical
296, 289 (11)
cyclosporin
Bandage lenses
Autologous
serum‡
PROSE treatment‡
TBUT, s:
Lubricant drops
3, 3 (8)
Lubricant
ointment
8, 8 (19)
Lacriserts
4.5, 4.5 (26)
Punctal occlusion
Topical steroids
Topical
cyclosporin
Autologous
serum‡
PROSE treatment‡
TBUT, s:
Lubricant drops
6.5, 6.5 (14)
Punctal occlusion
5.5, 5.5 (17)
Topical steroids
Schirmer, s:
Topical
cyclosporin
7, 10 (5)
Autologous
6, 7 (9)
serum‡

Doxycycline
Cetirizine
Atorvastatin
Aspirin
Dexlansoprazole
Mirtazapine
Risperidone
Clonazepam
Buproprion
Desvenlafaxine
Propanolol

TBUT, s:
2, 2 (11)

Additional
systemic
medications
during course

Gabapentin§
Carbamazepine§
Eszopiclone§
Tapentadol§
Vilazodone§
Tramadol
Oxycodone

Atorvastatin
Escitalopram (replaced
Aspirin
Duloxetine)
Dexlansoprazole Esomeprazole
Duloxetine

(None)

Gabapentin (taken
for 1 mo)

*Average response (0 to 4) for each OSDI question subgroup (A, Symptoms; B, Function; C, Environmental Triggers).
†At time of BFS consult.
‡Treatment prescribed after initial consultation.
§Treatment initiated after hospitalization for depression with suicidal ideation.

light sensitivity, blurriness, and pressure OU. He reported being
bedbound much of the day because of pain. He had started
loteprednol twice per day, which caused mild improvement in his
symptoms. He required oral narcotics for breakthrough pain
reported as 8 of 10. The situation was similar 3 months later, at
which time no SPK was observed OU and TBUT was 5 seconds
OU. The patient was advised to continue AST, increase flaxseed
oil to 3 tbsp/d, and start hot compresses and lid massage. During the next 3-month interval, he was treated elsewhere with
meibomian gland probing and punctal cautery, after which he
reported improvement of pain. During this period, the patient
remained under the care of ophthalmologists who treated his
ocular surface disease, as well as other clinicians who managed his
ongoing systemic medical treatment of pain and depression. At the
next 3-month follow-up visit and the end of the period reported in
this study (27 months after surgery), the patient had returned
from disability leave to employment and reported having 0 (of 10)
pain in the morning, 1 to 2 (of 10) pain when not working, and
4 to 5 (of 10) pain when working.

Case 2
A 48-year-old man with history of anxiety, allergic rhinitis,
and gastroesophageal reflux disease underwent LASIK OU with
subsequent enhancement procedures 6 months and 9 months
later (OS and OD, respectively). Seven months after his last enhancement procedure, he was referred to BFS for consideration
of PROSE treatment of dry eye syndrome after LASIK. The patient reported that he began to experience ocular pain and foreign
body sensation 1 month after the second enhancement procedure,
worse OS. He also described shooting pain when watching TV,
achiness, burning, light sensitivity, and difficulty sleeping because of eye pain. He had been initially treated with preservativefree lubricating drops eight times per day, Restasis twice per day,
prednisone 1% drops four times per day, hydroxypropyl cellulose
ophthalmic insert, punctal occlusion, fish oil/flaxseed oil 1000 mg/
845 mg twice per day, and ointment nightly with limited success.
At consultation, he reported continued light sensitivity, painful
and sore eyes, and discomfort with sustained visual activity. The

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 9, September 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

e236 Corneal Neuralgia after LASIKVTheophanous et al.

patient also reported a recent flare-up of anxiety and depression
symptoms. Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/15 OU. Ocular
Surface Disease Index score was 47.7 (average subgroup scores:
A = 1.2, B = 3.0, C = 1.5). Vital dye staining was classified as
an Oxford score of 0 OU. There was resolution of symptoms OU

with trial of PROSE devices; thus, PROSE treatment was undertaken. He was referred to MEE for consideration of treatment
with AST and for corneal imaging and was seen 1 month later. At
this visit, he reported that his pain symptoms were 7 of 10 and
improved to 2 of 10 with administration of topical proparacaine.

FIGURE 1.
In vivo confocal microscopy images showing corneal SNP taken at the time of initial MEE consultation. An image from a normal control is provided for
reference. Specific findings are detailed in the report of each case.
Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 9, September 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Corneal Neuralgia after LASIKVTheophanous et al.

In vivo confocal microscopy revealed significant diminishment
of his corneal nerves, high tortuosity of subbasal corneal nerves,
beading, and increased presence of immune dendritic cells in
both eyes (Fig. 1). Increased flaxseed oil was recommended and
AST eight times per day was added to his regimen, and fluorometholone eye drops were tapered. When he returned 2 months
later, he reported wearing PROSE devices in the early part of the
day and administering serum tears later in the day. He reported
that his baseline symptoms were 4 of 10 and improved to 2 of 10
with administration of proparacaine. He returned for subsequent
evaluation 2 months later, reporting that he had discontinued the
PROSE devices because he was feeling better. He rated his pain
that day as 6 of 10 improving to 2 of 10 with proparacaine. A
tapering course of loteprednol was added to his regimen. He
returned 1 month later, reporting his general baseline as 4 of 10 but
his symptoms with proparacaine trial went from 2 of 10 to 0 of 10.
Six months later, 12 months after initial consultation, the patient reported 1 of 10 pain OS only that improved to 0 of 10 with
proparacaine challenge. Tear breakup time was 8 seconds OU.
Examination showed 1+ inferior SPK OS. In vivo confocal microscopy showed increased corneal nerves with reduced inflammatory cells OS. The situation was similar at his next 3-month
follow-up on the same medication regimen. Four months later,
at the end of the study period (26 months after last surgery), the
patient’s pain was still 1 of 10 OS with no flare-ups. Tear breakup
time was 4.5 seconds OU. Examination showed trace superficial
punctate epithelial erosions inferiorly OU. In vivo confocal microscopy showed increased and more normal-appearing nerves
OU, with no inflammatory cells. At that time, the patient was
instructed to reduce AST to four times per day and to discontinue topical methylprednisone, which had been substituted for
loteprednol.

Case 3
A 30-year-old man was referred by a cornea specialist for
consideration of PROSE treatment. His symptoms were eyestrain worse with reading and watching TV, light sensitivity, and
morning dryness that started 2 months after LASIK that had been
performed OU 7 months previously by another cornea specialist. He was initially treated by the LASIK surgeon with topical
prednisolone and lubricant drops, which, by his own report,
ameliorated his symptoms at first, but the effect waned. Schirmer
tests with anesthesia performed by the referring doctor were 7 mm
OD and 10 mm OS with slit lamp revealing ‘‘dry patches.’’ Initial
evaluation at BFS revealed uncorrected visual acuity of 20/15 in
each eye. His OSDI score was 39.6 (average subgroup scores: A =
1.8, B = 2.5, C = 0). Corneal fluorescein staining was Oxford
1 OD and 0 OS. Soft lenses and PROSE devices were trialed
on each eye; neither lens type was comfortable or reduced light
sensitivity symptoms; hence, this path toward reduction of symptoms was not pursued. Of note, he also reported a generalized
somatic hypersensitivity disorder with ‘‘trigger points.’’ He was
referred to MEE for confocal study of corneal nerves and consideration of AST, and it was also suggested that he seek evaluation by
a pain specialist. A pain specialist prescribed gabapentin 300 mg
daily, but the patient elected to discontinue after 1 month because
of a lack of symptom relief.

e237

At initial MEE evaluation 3 months later, he reported persistent
symptoms of eyestrain, achiness, and light sensitivity for which
lubricant drops provided no relief. Schirmer test with anesthesia
showed 6 mm of wetting OD and 7 mm OS. Examination showed
trace SPK OD and 2+ SPK OS. In vivo confocal microscopy
showed significant diminishment of his corneal nerves, beading,
and increased presence of immune dendritic cells in both eyes
(Fig. 1). The patient was treated with pulse dosing of loteprednol,
followed by low maintenance dose of loteprednol, and flaxseed oil
2000 mg/d. Two weeks later, the patient reported limited change
in symptoms. Trace SPK was observed OU. The patient was
started on AST eight times per day.
Four months later, the patient reported improvement in light
sensitivity symptoms, which he rated as 5 of 10, but still reported
difficulty with harsh lighting and watching TV. He reported eye
fatigue and occasional pain upon awakening. Tear breakup time
was 6.5 seconds OU. Examination revealed trace SPK OU. In vivo
confocal microscopy showed increased nerve density and reduced
inflammatory cells OU. The patient was instructed to continue
his current regimen but to taper loteprednol to twice per week.
Three months later, at the end of the study period (17 months
after surgery), the patient reported improved symptoms, with
0 of 10 pain, mild grittiness and dryness, and intermittent light
sensitivity. Tear breakup time was 5.5 seconds OU. Examination
showed trace SPK OD and 1 to 2+ SPK OS. In vivo confocal
microscopy showed increased nerve density with increased inflammatory cells OD. The patient was instructed to continue
loteprednol twice per week, AST eight times per day, and flaxseed
oil 2 tbsp/d.

DISCUSSION
Although dry eye syndrome is common after LASIK, the patients in this study were referred for dry eye syndrome that was
persistent and unresponsive to standard therapy. In each case, the
clinical signs of dry eye and tear metrics were inconsistent with
the patient’s level of discomfort. Each patient reported symptoms
of pain, burning, soreness, achiness, and light sensitivity. Foreign
body sensation or grittiness was not a prominent feature for any
of them. Unlike typical LASIK-associated dry eye disease, the
symptoms experienced by these patients did not gradually wane
with time after surgery but rather persisted or increased. We believe that these patients had dry eye syndrome that was neuropathic in etiology, warranting treatment of underlying neuralgia
rather than treatment of aqueous deficient or evaporative dry eye.
Ocular Surface Disease Index responses were distinctive in that
each patient noted more severe discomfort in the Function subgroup compared with the Environmental Triggers or Symptoms
subgroups. Of note, two patients reported initial response of
symptoms to the improved environment offered by a PROSE
device while it was in place, consistent with dampening of what
might be neuropathic peripheral signaling of evaporation. Complete relief of symptoms with proparacaine that these patients initially experienced suggest a peripheral source of neuropathic pain.
Improving the ocular surface environment may down-regulate
ectopic, spontaneous, or hypersensitive signaling in nociceptor
pathways. Only partial relief with PROSE devices or proparacaine
suggests a central basis for pain.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 9, September 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

e238 Corneal Neuralgia after LASIKVTheophanous et al.

In vivo confocal microscopy revealed abnormality of the corneal SNP in these patients, with reduced nerve density and altered
morphology as the most prominent features. Increased tortuosity
of subbasal nerves is seen after chronic damage in diabetes27,28 and
Sjögren syndrome.29 Decreased nerve density is present in the
three patients reported here, as compared with normal eyes, although it remains unclear if the pattern and time course of SNP
abnormalities are different in these patients than in those who
recover more typically from post-LASIK dry eye. Nerve regeneration is visible on IVCM in almost all LASIK patients 1 month
after surgery, and in one quarter of patients, regenerated nerves
have reached the corneal apex by 3 months.30 The use of AST was
associated with improvement in symptoms in each of these patients. Although placebo effect might account for this improvement, the lack of relief with numerous other interventions suggests
a more specific mechanism.
This presentation of symptoms out of proportion to signs of
desiccation along with persistent abnormality of the SNP is
consistent with and characteristic of neuropathic pain. Neuropathic pain has been operationally defined as an abnormal pain
state that arises from a damaged peripheral nervous system or
central nervous system. There may be residual involvement of
nociceptors at the site of the original injury, creating a mixed
nociceptive-neuropathic pattern. In neuropathic pain, there is
perpetuation of pain initiated by neural tissue damage that is
beyond simple nociception.31 In the cases presented here, injury to
sensory nerves at the time of LASIK might have triggered a pain
pathway resulting in refractory symptoms historically attributed to
dry eye disease. We suggest that these and similar cases be categorized as corneal neuralgia after LASIK or post-LASIK neuralgia.
We emphasize that correlations can be drawn to CRPS, which
has as a hallmark pain that is out of proportion to the inciting
lesion.23 Traditionally a skin and soft tissue disorder, the pathophysiology suspected for CRPS involves neurogenic inflammation
and elevated neuropeptides,32 as well as autonomic dysfunction.33
Notably, increased neuropeptide levels in patients after LASIK
have been reported.34 Our proposal of a neuropathic basis for
symptoms in these patients is consistent with previous descriptions of dysfunctional lacrimal functional unit in dry eye patients
and, specifically, the occurrence of neurogenic inflammation of
interconnecting innervation after insult to the ocular surface.35
Symptoms of CRPS typically include burning and aching pain,
allodynia, edema, and sweating or temperature changes.23 Complex regional pain syndrome is further classified into type I, in
which no nerve damage is obvious, and type II, in which nerve
damage can be confirmed.23 We suggest that the patients in this
study might represent a variant of CRPS type II because they
present with confirmed nerve damage, pain out of proportion
to the injury, symptoms of burning pain, and autonomic dysfunction evidenced by marginally lower Schirmer test results. Of
note, the light sensitivity these patients report could be characterized as photoallodynia36 analogous to allodynia in CRPS.
The approach to CRPS is typically multimodal with local and
systemic treatments invoked. The goal is to reduce pain signaling
in the short run and centralization of pain in the long run, both
of which interfere with patient function. The patients reported
here were treated locally and systemically with multiple agents
and all reported improvement over time; common variables were

introduction of AST, which can contribute to nerve regeneration,37,38 PROSE devices, which can reduce peripheral signaling,
topical anti-inflammatory agents, which may reduce local inflammation that might up-regulate nerve signaling, and systemic
agents, which can gate or modify pain signaling.
There are reports on the use of neurotrophic factors, particularly nerve growth factor, demonstrating reduction of neuropathic pain.39,40 Therapeutic strategies resulting in regeneration
of damaged corneal nerves may improve patient symptoms. Administration of neurotrophic factors has been shown to result
in postinjury repair of peripheral nerves and their functional recovery.41 Autologous serum tears may have played such a role in
these patients.
Depression and emotional life events have also been associated
with CRPS,42 although this association remains unproven.23 One
patient with preexisting anxiety reported a resurgence of anxious
and depressive symptoms around the time his ocular symptoms
began. Another patient experienced severe depression in association with this syndrome, requiring hospitalization on two occasions. Systemic medications with neurologic and psychiatric
activity were part of the recovery of these two patients. Pain
without stain is real20 and, as illustrated by these cases, may best be
considered a neurologic problem with psychiatric implications.
Clinicians should consider involvement of pain specialists, neurologists, and psychiatrists in the care of these patients. Describing
the syndrome as a variant of CRPS type II may be helpful in
guiding therapy.
Multimodal treatment including AST, PROSE treatment, topical ophthalmologic agents, and systemic psychiatric and neurologic medication was used in these three patients; thus, the relative
contribution of each therapy to the patients’ improvement cannot be rigorously assessed. These patients ultimately achieved
resolution or near resolution of symptoms. These patients shared
a common time course of a highly symptomatic first year of
treatment of dry eye after LASIK followed by improvement once
multimodal therapy directed toward neuropathy was introduced.
Further studies of refractive surgery populations are warranted
to identify risk factors for developing this syndrome. Additional
data from IVCM studies are also likely to be useful in identifying patients with corneal neuralgia after LASIK. In vivo confocal
microscopy may serve as a metric for disease in corneal neuralgia
and for monitoring response to treatment.
In summary, patients with persistent dry eye symptoms out
of proportion to clinical signs after LASIK have a syndrome that
may best be classified as corneal neuralgia. In vivo confocal microscopy can be informative as to the neuropathic basis of this
condition. In keeping with current understanding of CRPS, early
multimodal treatment directed toward reducing peripheral neurologic signaling is warranted to avoid subsequent centralization
and persistence of pain on that basis. Distinguishing this syndrome from typical post-LASIK dry eye remains a challenge.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Drs. Jacobs and Hamrah share the role of senior and corresponding authors
for this article. The authors have no proprietary or commercial interests
to disclose.
Received January 30, 2015; accepted March 25, 2015.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 9, September 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Corneal Neuralgia after LASIKVTheophanous et al.

REFERENCES
1. Tahzib NG, Bootsma SJ, Eggink FA, Nabar VA, Nuijts RM.
Functional outcomes and patient satisfaction after laser in situ keratomileusis for correction of myopia. J Cataract Refract Surg 2005;
31:1943Y51.
2. Marinho A, Pinto MC, Pinto R, Vaz F, Neves MC. LASIK for high
myopia: one year experience. Ophthalmic Surg Lasers 1996;27:S517Y20.
3. Miller AE, McCulley JP, Bowman RW, Cavanagh HD, Wang XH.
Patient satisfaction after LASIK for myopia. CLAO J 2001;27:84Y8.
4. Hovanesian JA, Shah SS, Maloney RK. Symptoms of dry eye and
recurrent erosion syndrome after refractive surgery. J Cataract Refract
Surg 2001;27:577Y84.
5. Toda I, Asano-Kato N, Hori-Komai Y, Tsubota K. Laser-assisted in
situ keratomileusis for patients with dry eye. Arch Ophthalmol 2002;
120:1024Y8.
6. De Paiva CS, Chen Z, Koch DD, Hamill MB, Manuel FK, Hassan
SS, Wilhelmus KR, Pflugfelder SC. The incidence and risk factors
for developing dry eye after myopic LASIK. Am J Ophthalmol 2006;
141:438Y45.
7. Battat L, Macri A, Dursun D, Pflugfelder SC. Effects of laser in situ
keratomileusis on tear production, clearance, and the ocular surface.
Ophthalmology 2001;108:1230Y5.
8. Ambrosio R, Tervo T, Wilson SE. LASIK-associated dry eye and
neurotrophic epitheliopathy: pathophysiology and strategies for
prevention and treatment. J Refract Surg 2008;24:396Y407.
9. Tuisku IS, Lindbohm N, Wilson SE, Tervo TM. Dry eye and corneal
sensitivity after high myopic LASIK. J Refract Surg 2007;23:338Y42.
10. Vroman DT, Sandoval HP, Fernandez de Castro LE, Kasper TJ,
Holzer MP, Solomon KD. Effect of hinge location on corneal sensation and dry eye after laser in situ keratomileusis for myopia.
J Cataract Refract Surg 2005;31:1881Y7.
11. Rodriguez AE, Rodriguez-Prats JL, Hamdi IM, Galal A, Awadalla
M, Alio JL. Comparison of goblet cell density after femtosecond laser
and mechanical microkeratome in LASIK. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 2007;48:2570Y5.
12. Rodriguez-Prats JL, Hamdi IM, Rodriguez AE, Galal A, Alio JL.
Effect of suction ring application during LASIK on goblet cell
density. J Refract Surg 2007;23:559Y62.
13. Chao C, Golebiowski B, Stapleton F. The role of corneal innervation
in LASIK-induced neuropathic dry eye. Ocul Surf 2014;12:32Y45.
14. Mian SI, Li AY, Dutta S, Musch DC, Shtein RM. Dry eyes and
corneal sensation after laser in situ keratomileusis with femtosecond
laser flap creation. Effect of hinge position, hinge angle, and flap
thickness. J Cataract Refract Surg 2009;35:2092Y8.
15. Mian SI, Shtein RM, Nelson A, Musch DC. Effect of hinge position
on corneal sensation and dry eye after laser in situ keratomileusis
using a femtosecond laser. J Cataract Refract Surg 2007;33:1190Y4.
16. Calvillo MP, McLaren JW, Hodge DO, Bourne WM. Corneal
reinnervation after LASIK: prospective 3-year longitudinal study.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:3991Y6.
17. Patel SV, McLaren JW, Kittleson KM, Bourne WM. Subbasal nerve
density and corneal sensitivity after laser in situ keratomileusis:
femtosecond laser vs mechanical microkeratome. Arch Ophthalmol
2010;128:1413Y9.
18. Wilson SE, Ambrosio R. Laser in situ keratomileusis-induced
neurotrophic epitheliopathy. Am J Ophthalmol 2001;132:405Y6.
19. Nichols KK, Nichols JJ, Mitchell GL. The lack of association between signs and symptoms in patients with dry eye disease. Cornea
2004;23:762Y70.

e239

20. Rosenthal P, Baran I, Jacobs DS. Corneal pain without stain: is it
real? Ocul Surf 2009;7:28Y40.
21. Rosenthal P, Borsook D. The corneal pain system. Part I: the missing
piece of the dry eye puzzle. Ocul Surf 2012;10:2Y14.
22. International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP). IASP Taxonomy. Available at: http://www.iasp-pain.org/Taxonomy. Accessed
January 25, 2015.
23. Freedman M, Greis AC, Marino L, Sinha AN, Henstenburg J.
Complex regional pain syndrome: diagnosis and treatment. Phys
Med Rehabil Clin N Am 2014;25:291Y303.
24. Kheirkhah A, Dohlman TH, Amparo F, Arnoldner MA, Jamali A,
Hamrah P, Dana R. Effects of corneal nerve density on the response
to treatment in dry eye disease. Ophthalmology 2015;122:662Y8.
25. Schiffman RM, Christianson MD, Jacobsen G, Hirsch JD, Reis BL.
Reliability and validity of the Ocular Surface Disease Index. Arch
Ophthalmol 2000;118:615Y21.
26. Bron AJ, Evans VE, Smith JA. Grading of corneal and conjunctival
staining in the context of other dry eye tests. Cornea 2003;
22:640Y50.
27. Kallinikos P, Berhanu M, O’Donnell C, Boulton AJ, Efron N, Malik
RA. Corneal nerve tortuosity in diabetic patients with neuropathy.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004;45:418Y22.
28. Mocan MC, Durukan I, Irkec M, Orhan M. Morphologic alterations of both the stromal and subbasal nerves in the corneas of
patients with diabetes. Cornea 2006;25:769Y73.
29. Tuominen IS, Konttinen YT, Vesaluoma MH, Moilanen JA,
Helinto M, Tervo TM. Corneal innervation and morphology in primary Sjogren’s syndrome. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2003;44:2545Y9.
30. Deng S, Wang M, Zhang F, Sun X, Hou W, Guo N. Corneal
subbasal nerve fiber regeneration in myopic patients after laser in situ
keratomileusis. Neural Regen Res 2012;7:1556Y62.
31. Jay GW, Barkin RL. Neuropathic pain: etiology, pathophysiology,
mechanisms, and evaluations. Dis Mon 2014;60:6Y47.
32. Schinkel C, Gaertner A, Zaspel J, Zedler S, Faist E, Schuermann M.
Inflammatory mediators are altered in the acute phase of posttraumatic complex regional pain syndrome. Clin J Pain 2006;22:235Y9.
33. Borchers AT, Gershwin ME. Complex regional pain syndrome: a
comprehensive and critical review. Autoimmun Rev 2014;13:242Y65.
34. Nejima R, Miyata K, Tanabe T, Okamoto F, Hiraoka T, Kiuchi T,
Oshika T. Corneal barrier function, tear film stability, and corneal
sensation after photorefractive keratectomy and laser in situ keratomileusis. Am J Ophthalmol 2005;139:64Y71.
35. Stern ME, Gao J, Siemasko KF, Beuerman RW, Pflugfelder SC. The
role of the lacrimal functional unit in the pathophysiology of dry
eye. Exp Eye Res 2004;78:409Y16.
36. Aggarwal S, Kheirkhah A, Cavalcanti BM, Cruzat A, Colon C,
Brown E, Borsook D, Prüss H, Hamrah P. Autologous serum tears
for treatment of photoallodynia in patients with corneal neuropathy:
efficacy and evaluation with in vivo confocal microscopy. Ocul Surf
2015;Feb 20: E-pub ahead of print: doi:10.1016/j.jtos.2015.01.005.
37. Rao K, Leveque C, Pflugfelder SC. Corneal nerve regeneration in
neurotrophic keratopathy following autologous plasma therapy. Br J
Ophthalmol 2010;94:584Y91.
38. Bradley JC, Simoni J, Bradley RH, McCartney DL, Brown SM.
Time- and temperature-dependent stability of growth factor peptides
in human autologous serum eye drops. Cornea 2009;28:200Y5.
39. Cirillo G, Cavaliere C, Bianco MR, De Simone A, Colangelo AM,
Sellitti S, Alberghina L, Papa M. Intrathecal NGF administration
reduces reactive astrocytosis and changes neurotrophin receptors
expression pattern in a rat model of neuropathic pain. Cell Mol
Neurobiol 2010;30:51Y62.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 9, September 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

e240 Corneal Neuralgia after LASIKVTheophanous et al.
40. Colangelo AM, Bianco MR, Vitagliano L, Cavaliere C, Cirillo G, De
Gioia L, Diana D, Colombo D, Redaelli C, Zaccaro L, Morelli G,
Papa M, Sarmientos P, Alberghina L, Martegani E. A new nerve
growth factor-mimetic peptide active on neuropathic pain in rats.
J Neurosci 2008;28:2698Y709.
41. Takemura Y, Imai S, Kojima H, Katagi M, Yamakawa I, Kasahara T,
Urabe H, Terashima T, Yasuda H, Chan L, Kimura H, Matsusue Y.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor from bone marrow-derived cells
promotes post-injury repair of peripheral nerve. PLoS One 2012;
7:e44592.

42. Geertzen JH, de Bruijn H, de Bruijn-Kofman AT, Arendzen JH.
Reflex sympathetic dystrophy: early treatment and psychological
aspects. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1994;75:442Y6.

Deborah S. Jacobs
Boston Foundation for Sight
464 Hillside Ave Ste 205
Needham, MA 02494
e-mail: djacobs@bostonsight.org

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 9, September 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

