1040-5488/15/9201-0031/0 VOL. 92, NO. 1, PP. 31Y43
OPTOMETRY AND VISION SCIENCE
Copyright * 2014 American Academy of Optometry

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Eye Examination Testability in Children with
Autism and in Typical Peers
Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/optvissci by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC1y0abggQZXdtwnfKZBYtws= on 10/31/2020

Rachel Anastasia Coulter*, Annette Bade†, Yin Tea†, Gregory Fecho‡, Deborah Amster†, Erin Jenewein*,
Jacqueline Rodena‡, Kara Kelley Lyons§, G. Lynn Mitchell||, Nicole Quint**, Sandra Dunbar††,
Michele Ricamato‡‡, Jennie Trocchio§§, Bonnie Kabat||||, Chantel Garcia‡, and Irina Radik‡
ABSTRACT
Purpose. To compare testability of vision and eye tests in an examination protocol of 9- to 17-year-old patients with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD) to typically developing (TD) peers.
Methods. In a prospective pilot study, 61 children and adolescents (34 with ASD and 27 who were TD) aged 9 to 17 years
completed an eye examination protocol including tests of visual acuity, refraction, convergence (eye teaming), stereoacuity
(depth perception), ocular motility, and ocular health. Patients who required new refractive correction were retested after
wearing their updated spectacle prescription for 1 month. The specialized protocol incorporated visual, sensory, and
communication supports. A psychologist determined group status/eligibility using DSM-IV-TR (Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision) criteria by review of previous evaluations and parent responses
on the Social Communication Questionnaire. Before the examination, parents provided information regarding patients’ sex,
race, ethnicity, and, for ASD patients, verbal communication level (nonverbal, uses short words, verbal). Parents indicated
whether the patient wore a refractive correction, whether the patient had ever had an eye examination, and the age at the
last examination. Chi-square tests compared testability results for TD and ASD groups.
Results. Typically developing and ASD groups did not differ by age (p = 0.54), sex (p = 0.53), or ethnicity (p = 0.22).
Testability was high on most tests (TD, 100%; ASD, 88 to 100%), except for intraocular pressure (IOP), which was reduced
for both the ASD (71%) and the TD (89%) patients. Among ASD patients, IOP testability varied greatly with verbal communication level (p G 0.001). Although IOP measurements were completed on all verbal patients, only 37.5% of nonverbal
and 44.4% of ASD patients who used short words were successful.
Conclusions. Patients with ASD can complete most vision and eye tests within an examination protocol. Testability of IOPs
is reduced, particularly for nonverbal patients and patients who use short words to communicate.
(Optom Vis Sci 2015;92:31Y43)
Key Words: autism, children, eye examinations, vision acuity, tonometry
utism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are developmental
disabilities that occur in 1 out of 68 children in the United
States.1 Individuals with ASD have difficulties in reciprocal social interaction, verbal and nonverbal communication, and
processing sensory stimuli. Because of these difficulties, patients
with ASD may be unable to respond to subjective vision testing or

A

to complete medical procedures. For eye care providers seeking to
examine patients with ASD, little information is available. Clinicians need information regarding how to select tests or modify
procedures to facilitate patients’ ability to complete testing. Clinicians also need evidence on ASD patients’ ability to complete
tests within an eye examination.

*OD, MS, FAAO
†
OD, FAAO
‡
OD
§
PsyD
||
MAS, FAAO
**DrOT, OTR/L
††
DPA, OTR/L
‡‡
MA, CCC-SLP
§§
PhD
||||
BA
College of Optometry (RAC, AB, YT, GF, DA, EJ, JR, CG, IR), and College
of Health Care Sciences (NQ, SD), Nova Southeastern University, Fort

Lauderdale, Florida; Neurocognitive Consultants, North Miami, Florida
(KKL); The Ohio State University College of Optometry, Columbus, Ohio
(GLM); Soaring Eagle Academy, Burr Ridge, Illinois (MR); CasaBlanca
Academy, Hollywood, Florida (JT); and Educational Specialist, Fort Lauderdale,
Florida (BK).
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations
appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this
article on the journal’s Web site (www.optvissci.com).
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 3.0 License, where it is
permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly cited. The
work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

32 Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

Testability is defined as the ability of a patient to complete a
vision or eye test; clinically, it is determined as the proportion of
patients within a defined population who are able to complete a
test or procedure. For the typically developing (TD) preschool
population, studies of vision testing have reported testability of
visual acuity,2Y5 stereoacuity,2,5,6 and refraction tests.2,7 Few studies
have reported testability results for patients with ASD. In 2009,
Milne et al.8 investigated vision screening of 51 school-aged patients
with ASD and 44 TD patients aged 8 to 18 years using a battery of
vision acuity, stereoacuity, cover test, prism fusion range, near point
of convergence (NPC), and optokinetic response. Patients with
ASD were categorized as high functioning (HF) or low functioning
(LF) based on full-scale IQ score on the Weschler Abbreviated Scale
of Intelligence test; HF patients had scores greater than or equal to
70, whereas LF patients had scores less than 70 or could not
complete the initial test trials. Testability varied by functioning level
and ranged from 86 to 100% for HF patients and 40 to 80% for LF
patients. In 1992, Scharre and Creedon9 reported outcomes of a
visual assessment performed in a school setting of 34 children with
autism aged 2 to 11 years. Reported testability was high for most
tests; 97% of patients completed Teller card binocular visual acuity,
near retinoscopy, unilateral cover test, voluntary smooth pursuit,
and optokinetic nystagmus response. Only 47% of patients, however, were able to complete Lang stereoacuity testing.9
To date, no study has prospectively investigated the testability
of vision tests and ocular health within a comprehensive eye examination protocol in the ASD population or has compared these
results to those of TD peers. This information is needed for eye
care providers to select vision tests, diagnose and manage vision
problems, and establish a standard of care for ASD patients. The
purpose of this study was to determine testability of school-aged
patients with ASD on vision and eye tests within an examination
protocol and to compare these results to those of TD peers. To
promote the ability of patients with ASD to complete testing, an
eye examination protocol was designed that incorporated visual,
communication, and sensory supports and behavioral strategies.

Creation of an Eye Examination Protocol
Challenges associated with ASD include difficulties with communication, motor planning, sensory processing, transitioning from
task to task, maintaining attention, and engagement. A specialized
eye examination protocol that targeted these challenges and that
could be easily incorporated into clinical practice was designed. This
protocol incorporated visual, sensory, and communication supports; included behavioral strategies; and used tests and techniques
that minimized tactile sensitivity issues. By minimizing undesirable
stimuli, modifying instruction sets, and preparing the patient with
ASD, the protocol aimed to maximize the ability of patients with
ASD to respond, stay on task, remain calm and regulated, and
complete testing procedures.

Supports and Modifications for Patients with ASD
Communication Supports
To support ASD patients’ receptive and expressive communication, the eye examination protocol used several supports and
modifications. A speech and language pathologist reviewed traditional instruction sets. Lengthy and complex statements were

eliminated and rephrased to be short, simple, direct, and as exact
as possible. Investigators adjusted the rate of their speech to allow
the patient additional time to hear, interpret, and respond to
directions. Subjects with ASD are more likely to complete a task
when the task is presented as a choice of desired positive behaviors.10 In this protocol, this was applied to eye and vision testing;
for example, when testing stereoacuity, the investigator asked the
patient, ‘‘Do you want to put on the Polaroid glasses or do you
want me to put them on you?’’
For patients with ASD and minimal or limited ability to speak,
patients were allowed to respond using augmentative and alternative
communication devices.11 These include the patients’ habitual communication boards, electronic devices, speech-generating devices,
and tablet computers.11,12 Investigators also used the Answers:
YesNo Application (Simplified Touch), presented on a smartphone
or tablet computer, to allow nonverbal patients to answer ‘‘yes’’ or
‘‘no’’ to examination-related questions such as ‘‘Can you see the
letters on the chart?’’13
Visual Supports
A variety of visual supports were used to enable patients with
ASD to understand test instructions and the sequencing of tasks
within the eye examination. With the guidance of a speech and
language pathologist, visual representations of instruction sets
were created. Verbal directions were paired with pictures and
gestures so that patients with ASD could better understand what
they were expected to do and what they needed to look for.14,15
Other visual supports, identified from the special education literature including a social story and a visual schedule, were also used.
Social Story
A social story was provided to all families of patients with ASD
to ease transitions and avoid behavioral meltdowns (see Fig. 1 and
Supplemental Digital Content 1, a pdf file of the complete social
story, available at http://links.lww.com/OPX/A189). Written as a
short narrative illustrated by photographs, pictures, or symbols, a
social story prepares the patient for potentially challenging experiences by concretely identifying strategies, showing positive
behaviors, and demonstrating what other people will do to help
the patient.16Y18 Social stories have been used to prepare patients
with ASD for doctor visits, dental visits, allergy tests, blood draws,
and electroencephalogram testing.19Y22 Social stories must meet
specific guidelines for format and language.18,23 When created
according to these specifications, social stories decrease tantrums
and inappropriate behaviors and increase positive behaviors such
as initiating social interactions and responding on task.23
To prepare patients for the eye examination visit, a social story
was created that described each step of the examination experience from arriving in the clinic, entering the examination room,
meeting the doctor, and preparing for each procedure or test (see
Supplemental Digital Content 1, a pdf file of the complete social story, available at http://links.lww.com/OPX/A189). Special
education teachers with expertise in social stories for students
with ASD wrote the social story according to Gray’s published
guidelines. Two versions were createdVone at a fourth grade
reading level and one at a first grade reading level. The social story
was provided a few weeks in advance, so that the patient’s parents or
caregivers could read it to the patient several times before the visit.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

33

FIGURE 1.
Social storyVthe ﬁrst page. For the complete ﬁrst grade version of social story, see Supplemental Digital Content 1, ‘‘A Day at the Eye Doctor!,’’ available at
http://links.lww.com/OPX/A189.

Visual Schedule
A visual schedule was also used in the eye examination protocol.
Visual schedules use photographs or pictures to represent the activities and procedures that will occur and their sequence (see Fig. 2
or Supplemental Digital Content 2, which provides a pdf file of
the visual schedule, available at http://links.lww.com/OPX/A190).
By informing patients with ASD of what will happen next, visual
schedules help patients to make transitions, remember how to respond, and reduce anxiety due to uncertainty.24 Visual schedules are
more effective than language-based communication for patients
with ASD. They target these patients’ relative strengths in simultaneous processing instead of relying on social or language reasoning abilities.25 Studies have shown that visual schedules enhance
on-task behavior and independent functioning and increase the
speed of completing transitions.25Y27
A visual schedule of the activities and eye examination procedures of the eye examination visit was created using a series
of photographs (see Fig. 2 or Supplemental Digital Content 2,
which provides a pdf file of the visual schedule, available at

http://links.lww.com/OPX/A190). The visual schedule displayed
the name and a photograph of each procedure in the eye examination protocol and the sequence of the procedures. The
visual schedule was available to the patient and the examiner
in both a laminated card format and within an iPad/iPhone
application called First/Then.28 The photographs used in the
visual schedule matched those used in the social story.

Supports and Modifications for Motor
Planning Challenges
Patients with ASD often experience motor planning difficulties,
that is, the ability to connect the intention of making a motor
movement to the execution of the movement itself. To enable
nonverbal patients to respond when a response required a point
or gesture, motor approximations were accepted. For example,
patients responding to visual acuity testing on a picture on a response card were allowed to respond by touching the picture with
their whole hand rather than required to point to the picture.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

34 Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

FIGURE 2.
Section of visual schedule. For the entire visual schedule, see Supplemental Digital Content 2, ‘‘Visual Schedule!,’’ available at http://links.lww.com/OPX/A190.

Supports for Sensory Processing Challenges
Patients with ASD have difficulty modulating or processing
visual, tactile, and auditory stimuli.29,30 In an eye examination,
tests that are particularly problematic are tests that present bright
lights such as binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy (BIO) and tests
that involve touching the patient’s face and eye area such as the
slit lamp examination and drop instillation. Research shows that
patients with ASD are more tolerant to unpleasant stimuli when
the stimulus presentation is more predictable and patients perceive
they have some control.29,30 Strategies that may increase patient
tolerance include distraction techniques such as having the examiner sing, count, or recite the alphabet with patients while
performing the procedure and having sensory toys and items
available for patients that match their sensory needs.29,30
In creating the eye examination protocol, tests were selected
that were less likely to elicit patients’ tactile defensiveness. For

example, to obtain intraocular pressures (IOPs), an ICare rebound
tonometer was used. This instrument was selected because it was
small, did not require anesthetic drops to be administered before
obtaining IOPs, and minimally obstructed the visual field. To
maximize testability of patients with ASD, all the above supports
were incorporated into the eye examination protocol.

Behavioral Strategies
To encourage patients to complete tasks that were particularly
challenging, positive behaviors were encouraged through the techniques of shaping and high-probability request/low-probability request.
In shaping, a new behavior such as tolerating a bright light is developed through successive reinforcement of attempts that are closer
and closer to the desired behavior. For example, a patient tolerates a
binocular indirect ophthalmoscope beam, first on his legs, then his

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

shoulders, then his face, and finally his eyes. In high-probability
request/low-probability request, requests are first made to do a task
that is likely to be done. This is followed by a request that is less likely
to be done with the intention of creating momentum. An example
would be to first ask a patient to tolerate the ICare tonometer being
held by his or her arm before asking him or her to tolerate it against
his or her forehead.

METHODS
All investigators followed the tenets of the Declaration of
Helsinki throughout the study. The Nova Southeastern University
(NSU) Institutional Review Board approved the protocol and informed consent forms. The parent or guardian (subsequently referred to as parent) of each study patient gave written informed
consent. Each participating patient completed the assent process
according to the protocol approved by the NSU Institutional Review Board. Special procedures, described below, were designed to
obtain assent from ASD patients with limited communication skills.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act authorization
was obtained from parents.

Study Flow
Patient Selection
To participate in the study, patients had to be between 9 and
17 years. A total of 61 patients, 34 with ASD and 27 who were
TD, were enrolled. Recruitment fliers were distributed through
several venues including the University of Miami-NSU Center for
Autism and Related Disabilities e-newsletter, the Broward County
Chapter of the Autism Society of America, NSU Health Profession Division Clinics, Denise’s List (a Yahoo listserv for parents of
children with autism), Broward County public schools, private
schools, local therapy centers, and community health fairs. Subjects were also recruited with the assistance of the Interactive
Autism Network Research Database at the Kennedy Krieger Institute and Johns Hopkins Medicine-Baltimore, sponsored by
the Autism Speaks Foundation. Parents responded to recruitment
fliers by contacting the principal investigator or a coinvestigator
who completed a prescreening. If the patient appeared to be eligible, an intake visit was scheduled with the parent only.

Intake Visit
Parents provided information regarding the patient’s sex, race,
ethnicity, and medication usage. Parents indicated whether the
patient wore a refractive correction, whether the patient had ever
had an eye examination, and the age at the last eye examination.
Parents of patients with ASD specified the patient’s verbal communication level from three options: (1) nonverbal or minimally
verbal; (2) uses short words, can answer questions at least partially;
or (3) verbal, speaks fluently, is able to answer questions completely. Parents also indicated how their child preferred to communicate: using an iPad/iPhone, the YesNo application, gestures,
some words, or words fluently.
For patients identified as ASD, parents provided documentation of the autism spectrum diagnosis. All parents completed the
Social Communication Questionnaire, a standardized instrument

35

used to screen for ASDs. Parents were offered a social story to
prepare their child for the eye examination visit.

Confirmation of ASD and TD Group Eligibility
A psychologist with expertise in ASD diagnosis determined
eligibility and group status based on the presence or absence of an
ASD diagnosis and symptoms consistent with autism spectrum
conditions. Children were included in the ASD group if they held
community diagnoses and their diagnoses were confirmed using
DSM-IV-TR (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision) criteria based on review of
previous evaluations combined with parent ratings of symptoms
on the Social Communication Questionnaire.31 Children were
included in the TD group if they had never received a diagnosis of
ASD, and they did not show any research evidence of an ASDrelated disorder (i.e., did not exceed the cutoff score of nine on
the Social Communication Questionnaire). Of the 64 patients
who completed the prescreening and whose parents completed the
intake visit, 61 met criteria for the TD or ASD groups.

Eye Examination Visit
All patients who met the criteria of the ASD or TD group were
scheduled for an eye examination study visit. Study staff worked
with families to schedule appointments for patients with ASD to
maximize patient cooperation. The assent process with the child
or adolescent was conducted at the time of the eye examination,
before any procedures were initiated. The TD children and
children with ASD who could read signed an assent form. If the
parent or guardian indicated that the child diagnosed with ASD
could not read the assent form, it was read to the child and the
principal investigator documented the child’s response to the
verbal assent process.

Examination Procedures
The following measurements were taken at the eye examination
study visit (listed in order of administration): binocular distance
visual acuity, monocular distance visual acuity (OD then OS),
retinoscopy, cover/uncover (unilateral cover) test and alternate
cover test with prism neutralization at distance and near, near
point of convergence (NPC), ocular motility testing (fixation,
saccades, pursuits), near fusional vergence (break and recovery),
stereoacuity, monocular estimation method retinoscopy, binocular near visual acuity, and monocular near visual acuity (OD then
OS). All testing at near was performed at 40 cm. Ocular health
testing was sequenced as follows: extraocular muscle movement
testing, pupils, anterior segment evaluation, tonometry, dilated
posterior segment evaluation, and cycloplegic retinoscopy.
Cycloplegic retinoscopy findings were analyzed according to
study criteria for prescribing (Table 1). A refractive correction was
prescribed for patients if it was determined that there was a significant difference between the patient’s habitual refractive correction and their measured refractive error. Patients requiring a
new refractive correction wore their new correction for at least
4 weeks and then returned and completed all vision testing, excluding ocular health tests that had been completed at their
initial examination.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

36 Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.
TABLE 1.

Near Point of Convergence

Refractive error prescribing criteria
Identification of significant refractive error
A significant refractive error or change was defined as:
Q1.75 D of hyperopia
Q0.50 D of myopia
Q1.25 D of astigmatism
Q1.00 D of anisometropia in spherical equivalent, or Q1.50 D
of anisometropia in any meridian (based on cycloplegic
refraction)
Prescribing guidelines
For hyperopes, the investigator could reduce the prescription
by up to 1.25 D.
For myopia, full correction was required.
For anisometropia and astigmatism, full correction
was required.

Distance Visual Acuity
Patients wore refractive correction for all vision testing except
ocular health evaluation. Binocular visual acuity testing began by
presenting the Snellen acuity chart to the patient. Patients responded
verbally or by typing the letter on a communication device. If the
patient was unable to respond to the Snellen acuity chart, visual
acuity testing was attempted with the LEA Symbol Crowded
Symbol Book (Good-Lite, Elgin, IL, 250700). Patients responded
by verbally identifying the symbol or by matching the correct picture
using the Response Key Card (Good-Lite, 251700).
To obtain monocular visual acuity, the examiner occluded an
eye using an occluder. If the patient showed resistance to the
occluder that lasted more than 5 seconds, the patient’s eye was
occluded using the palm of the examiner’s or parent’s hand. If the
patient still showed resistance, monocular visual acuity was discontinued and only a binocular visual acuity was obtained.

Retinoscopy
The patient viewed a target of interest at 10 feet through +2.00diopter (D) fogging lenses. Targets used included a parent waving
to the patient or a video shown on an iPad or portable DVD
player. The examiner neutralized the refractive error for each eye
using the Luneau Retinoscopy Rack (Lombart Instruments) supplemented by loose lenses. The examiner determined his or her
working distance and recorded the net retinoscopy findings in each
meridian for each eye.

Cover Test at Distance and NearVUnilateral and
Alternate Cover Test
During the cover test, the patient was presented a fixation target
of a 20/30 isolated letter or symbol. The unilateral cover test was
administered to determine the presence of strabismus, and if so,
whether it was intermittent or constant. To determine the magnitude of the strabismus or phoria, the alternate cover test with
prism neutralization procedure was administered. A prism bar
(Gulden B-16 horizontal prism bar with prismatic levels from
1 prism diopter ($) to 45$; Gulden Ophthalmics, Elkins Park,
PA) was used to neutralize the deviation using a bracketing method.

The examiner held a ruler with the zero point of the ruler
parallel and equal to the bridge of the patient’s nose. The examiner
showed the patient a detailed fixation stick target of 20/30 (GoodLite, 542055), either with Sloan letters or Lea symbols, at the
midline of the patient’s body. The patient was instructed to ‘‘Look
here. Tell me when the letters/pictures break into two, but try to
keep the target single/one as long as possible. When it breaks
try to see one.’’ To visually show the patient what to look for,
while giving the verbal instructions, the examiner also showed the
patient the visual demonstration card showing double versus
single images.
The examiner moved the fixation target toward the subject at
approximately 1 to 2 cm/s until the examiner observed a loss of
fusion. This point was considered the NPC break. The distance
from the NPC break to the bridge of the patient’s nose was
measured to the nearest centimeter with the ruler. The target then
was moved away from the subject until the examiner observed a
recovery of fusion. Both the NPC break and recovery were
measured to the nearest centimeter and the test was performed
three times.

Evaluation of Fixation
For fixation assessment and NSUCO (Northeastern State
University College of Optometry) oculomotor testing, testing was
completed while the patient was standing. Using a nickel-plated
ball target (Good-Lite, Wolff Wand kit, 660700), the patient
was instructed to ‘‘Look here,’’ while pointing to the target. The
examiner determined if the patient was able to maintain fixation
for at least 10 seconds.

NSUCO Oculomotor Test
For all NSUCO oculomotor testing, the patient stood in front
of the examiner. To determine if the patient understood the words
used in the NSUCO saccades and pursuit tests, a pretest for
NSUCO was performed. The patient was shown the nickel-plated
(silver) and brass-plated (gold) ball targets (Good-Lite, Wolff
Wand kit, 660700). The patient was directed to ‘‘Touch the gold
ball.’’ The patient was then directed to ‘‘Touch the silver ball.’’ If
the patient responded by touching the gold and silver ball after the
corresponding instruction, the patient passed the pretest. The
examiner then proceeded to administer the NSUCO oculomotor
test for saccades and pursuits. If the patient could not pass the
pretest, NSUCO saccades and NSUCO pursuit tests were not
performed and the patient was recorded as untestable.

NSUCO Oculomotor TestVSaccades
The examiner held the nickel-plated (silver) and brass-plated
(gold) ball targets (Good-Lite, Wolff Wand kit, 660700) at
Harmon’s distance (the distance from the patient’s elbow to the
middle knuckle) from the patient. Each target was held 10 cm
from the midline of the patient. The instructions to the patient
were ‘‘I have two balls. When I say silver, look at the silver ball.
When I say gold, look at the gold ball. Remember, don’t look until
I tell you.’’ The examiner then alternately said ‘‘gold’’ and ‘‘silver’’

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

and repeated these so that the patient had to make 10 saccades
(5 to the gold target and 5 to the silver target). The examiner
observed the saccadic eye movements and rated the patient’s
performance in head movement and body movement, ability, and
accuracy using standardized scoring criteria.

37

of the right eye at approximately 2$ per second, stopping when
the patient lost fusion and failed to show a responsive convergence
movement. This was recorded as the break point. The examiner
then increased the base-out demand by 5 more prism diopters and
then at a rate of about 2$ per second reduced the base-out prism
until the patient regained single vision.

NSUCO Oculomotor TestVPursuit
The examiner held a nickel-plated (silver) ball target at Harmon’s
distance (distance from the patient’s elbow to the middle knuckle)
or no farther from 40 cm from the patient. The examiner instructed
the patient, ‘‘Watch the silver ball go around. Don’t move your
head. Keep watching the ball.’’ The examiner moved the fixation
target in a path no more than 20 cm in diameter, performed at the
midline of the patient.
The examiner observed the pursuit eye movement and rated the
performance in the categories of head movement and body movement, ability, and accuracy using standardized scoring criteria.

Monocular Estimation Method Retinoscopy

Negative Fusional Vergence at Near

Testing for near visual acuity was performed with letters using
the SLOAN ETDRS (Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy
Study) Format Near Point Vision Test (Precision Vision, 2106). If
the patient did not respond to letters, testing was done using the
LEA Symbols Near Vision (Good-Lite, 250800) and matching
response card (Good-Lite, 251700). The patient’s responses were
considered correct if the patient either said the correct letter or
picture symbol or matched the correct picture on the LEA
Symbols response card.

Negative fusional vergence was measured with a horizontal
prism bar (Gulden B-16 horizontal prism bar with prismatic levels
from 1$ to 45$; Gulden Ophthalmics, Elkins Park, PA) while the
patient fixated a handheld fixation target. The patient looked at
a single column of letters or Lea symbols (Good-Lite, 542055)
of 20/30 equivalent at a distance of 40 cm. The patient was
instructed to ‘‘Look here. Tell me when the letters/pictures become blurred or break into two, but try to keep the target single/
one as long as possible. When it breaks, try to see one.’’
To provide a visual support, while giving the verbal instructions,
the examiner also showed the patient the visual demonstration card
showing blur and diplopia. The examiner held the prism bar in
a base-in direction in front of the right eye and increased the
amount of base-in prism in front of the right eye at approximately
2$ per second, stopping when the patient lost fusion and no longer
made a divergence movement in response to increasing prism. This
was recorded as the break point. The examiner then increased the
base-in demand by 5 more prism diopters and then at a rate of
about 2$ per second reduced the base-in prism until the patient
regained fusion as indicated by a divergence movement or the
patient stating that he or she saw one.

The patient sat opposite to the examiner. The examiner held
the retinoscope with a monocular estimation method reading or
picture card attached. The examiner instructed the patient to
‘‘Keep your eyes open. Read the words or look at the pictures
here.’’ The examiner briefly (G1 second) held a loose lens in front
of one eye at a time to neutralize the motion of the reflex in each
eye. The lens that neutralized the reflex was recorded.

Near Visual Acuity

Stereoacuity
Stereoacuity testing was first attempted with the Random Dot
2 Stereotest (Good-Lite, 100750). If the patient did not respond
to the Random Dot 2 Stereotest, testing was attempted with the
Random Dot E (Precision Vision, 3700) using a forced-choice
presentation. If the patient did not respond to either the Random
Dot Stereotest or the Random Dot E test, testing was attempted
with the Lang Stereotest 1 (Bernell, Mishawaka, IN). For the Lang
Stereotest, the patient was allowed to match presented black and
white pictures of the picture targets to the Lang testing plate.

Extraocular Muscle Movements and Pupils

Positive Fusional Vergence (Convergence Amplitudes)
at Near

The examiner tested extraocular muscle movements and pupils
and recorded any abnormalities.

Positive fusional vergence was measured three times with a
horizontal prism bar (Gulden B-16 horizontal prism bar with
prismatic levels from 1$ to 45$; Gulden Ophthalmics, Elkins
Park, PA) while the patient fixated a handheld fixation target. The
target used was a single column of letters or Lea symbols (GoodLite, 542055) of 20/30 equivalent at a distance of 40 cm. The
patient was instructed to ‘‘Look here. Tell me when the letters/
pictures become blurred or break into two. Try to keep the target
single/one as long as possible. When it breaks try to see one.’’
While giving the verbal instructions, the examiner also showed the
patient the visual demonstration card showing blur and diplopia.
The examiner held the prism bar in a base-out direction in front of
the right eye and increased the amount of base-out prism in front

Anterior Segment Evaluation and Tonometry
The examiner examined the structures of the anterior segment
using a slit lamp or an Eidolon Bluminator ophthalmic illuminator (Eidolon Optical, Natick, MA) and/or direct ophthalmoscopy. The examiner noted any disease present.
For tonometry and BIO, the patient was seated watching a
DVD video player placed at eye level. While the patient watched a
DVD video, tonometry testing was attempted using the ICare
Rebound tonometer. Up to three attempts were made to measure
the IOP. If a readable finding was not obtained after three attempts, tonometry testing was discontinued and the patient was
recorded as untestable.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

38 Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

Instillation of Mydriatic/Cycloplegic Spray
A combination mydriatic/cycloplegic spray of 0.5% tropicamide, 0.5% cyclopentolate, and 2.5% phenylephrine was used.
This commonly used combination achieves effective mydriasis
and cycloplegia in the pediatric population, while minimizing
risks associated with cyclopentolate.32,33 Of specific concern for
the ASD population, instillation of cyclopentolate has been reported
to elicit seizures in patients with neurological impairment.32
While the patient watched a video, the examiner told the patient that the spray would be instilled and practiced singing and
counting with them. The examiner administered a mydriatic,
cycloplegic spray of 0.5% tropicamide, 0.5% cyclopentolate, and
2.5% phenylephrine to both eyes simultaneously, a technique
called the Fecho double spray instillation (Fig. 3).

Posterior Segment Evaluation and
Cycloplegic Retinoscopy
Thirty minutes after instillation of the combination mydriatic/
cycloplegic spray, posterior segment evaluation and cycloplegic
retinoscopy were completed.

flippers of +2.00. The examiner neutralized the refractive error
for each eye using the Luneau Retinoscopy Rack (Lombart Instruments) and/or loose lenses. The examiner determined his or
her working distance and recorded the net retinoscopy findings
in each meridian for the OD and OS.

Need for Refractive Correction
The patient’s cycloplegic retinoscopy findings were compared
with study guidelines for refractive correction to determine if a
new refractive correction was indicated (Table 1). For patients
whose findings showed a significant difference from their habitual
correction and their cycloplegic retinoscopy findings, a new spectacle prescription was provided. The patient wore the appropriate
spectacle correction for 4 weeks and returned to the clinic to repeat
the following tests: binocular distance visual acuity, monocular
distance visual acuity, retinoscopy, cover/uncover (unilateral cover)
test and alternate cover test with prism neutralization at distance and
near, NPC, ocular motility testing, near fusional vergence (break
and recovery), stereoacuity, monocular estimation method retinoscopy, binocular near visual acuity, and monocular near visual
acuity. The results from this second testing session were used in data
analysis.

Binocular Indirect Ophthalmoscopy
To encourage the patient to tolerate the bright beam of the
binocular indirect ophthalmoscope, a shaping technique was used.
The light beam was presented to the patient in an incremental
manner. The examiner presented the light beam to the patient first
by shining the beam on the examiner’s hand first and then on the
patient’s hand. The examiner then counted for 5 seconds holding
the light beam on the patient’s leg and then backed away. This
pattern was repeated as the beam was shown the patient’s hand,
face, and eye. The examiner then put the BIO on his or her head
and shined it into the patient’s eye and counted with the patient
for 5 seconds. The examiner used a lighted toy to direct the patient’s
direction of gaze during the examination of the peripheral fundus.

Statistical Analysis
All statistical testing was performed using SAS version 9.3. Chisquare tests were used to compare testability of patient groups (TD vs.
ASD) and based on communication level reported by the parent
(nonverbal, uses short words, verbal/able to speak fluently). Independent sample t tests were used to compare the mean age and
time since last eye examination between TD and ASD patients.
For comparisons of age and time since last examination between
levels of communication, analysis of variance was used with the
Tukey method used to control the overall error rate of any post hoc
pairwise comparisons.

Cycloplegic Retinoscopy

RESULTS

The patient viewed video playing on a DVD placed on a table
or chair 3 feet away. The patient viewed the target through lens

Between August 2010 and June 2012, 61 patients aged 9 to
17 years were enrolled. The mean age for each group did not differ
significantly (p = 0.54): ASD, mean age = 11.65 years; SD = 2.8;
and TD, mean age = 11.22 years; SD = 2.5. Of note, given the
typical sex distribution for the ASD population of four male
subjects to each female subject, the sex distribution for both the
ASD and TD groups was similar (p = 0.53): for the ASD group,
59% were male, and for the TD group, 66% were male. Race was
also similar: 96% of TD patients and 79% of ASD patients were
white (p = 0.067). Among those identified as white, there were no
significant differences between groups in the percentage of patients who were Hispanic (p = 0.22). Typically developing patients
were more likely to be medication free (p = 0.056).
Among the ASD patients, parental report of verbal communication indicated that 23% (n = 8) were nonverbal, 27% (n = 9) were
verbal and able to use short words, and 50% (n = 17) were verbal/
spoke fluently. There were no age differences between patients in the
three communication levels (p = 0.20). The average age of verbal
ASD patients was 11.71 years (SD = 2.7), whereas patients using

FIGURE 3.
Fecho double spray instillation.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

short words were, on average, 10.44 years (SD = 2.6). Nonverbal
ASD patients were, on average, 12.88 years (SD = 3.0).

Parent Report of Prior Eye Examination
Nearly two-thirds (65%) of the ASD patients had a previous eye
examination compared with 85% of TD patients (p = 0.071).
Among the ASD patients, the percentage who had attended a prior
eye examination differed only slightly by the level of reported
verbal communication: 50% of the nonverbal patients, 56% of the
patients who used short words, and 77% of the verbal patients
who spoke fluently (p = 0.35).

39

patients (mean = 1.00 years; SD = 0.9; p = 0.94). In contrast, the
average time since an eye examination was significantly longer for
both the patients using short words to communicate (mean =
4.00 years; SD = 2.7; p G 0.001) and nonverbal patients (mean =
4.75 years; SD = 3.1; p G 0.001).

Testability of Vision and Eye Test Measures
As shown in Table 2, the proportion of ASD patients able to
complete testing was high for most vision and eye tests (TD, 100%;
ASD, 88 to 100%), except for IOP measurement, which was reduced
in both the ASD group (71%) and the TD group (89%; p = 0.083).
For all measures except IOP (p G 0.001), there was no association
between communication level of ASD patients and testability.

Parent Report of Time since Last Eye Examination
Information on the age of the patient at his or her last eye
examination and current age was used to calculate the time since
last examination for those with a previous examination. The time
between the study visit and the last reported eye examination was
greater for ASD patients (mean = 2.36 years; SD = 2.5) than TD
patients (mean = 0.70 years; SD = 1.1; p = 0.007). Time since last
eye examination for verbal patients was similar to that of TD

Testability of Visual Acuity Measures
Binocular distance visual acuity could be obtained for all TD
and ASD patients (Table 2). Similarly, monocular distance visual
acuity could be obtained for all TD and all but one ASD patient.
For both patient groups, visual acuity at distance was primarily
obtained using the Snellen letter chart: 100% of TD patients and
71% of ASD patients. Further examination of the ASD patients,

TABLE 2.

Number (and percentage) of patients completing each clinical measure, by patient type and communication level
TD
(n = 27)

ASD
(n = 34)

ASD: verbal
(n = 17)

Clinical measure

ASD: use short
words (n = 9)

ASD: nonverbal
(n = 8)

n (%)

Refraction and accommodative function measures
Retinoscopy
27 (100)
Cycloplegic retinoscopy
27 (100)
Monocular estimated method retinoscopy
27 (100)
Ocular health measures
Anterior segment evaluation
27 (100)
Posterior segment evaluation
27 (100)
Intraocular pressure
24 (88)
Visual acuity measures
Distance visual acuity
Binocular
27 (100)
Monocular OD, OS
27 (100)
Near visual acuity
Binocular
27 (100)
Monocular OD, OS
27 (100)
Binocular vision measures
Stereoacuity
27 (100)
Cover test distance and near
27 (100)
Near point of convergence
Break
27 (100)
Recovery
27 (100)
Vergence at near
Base-in to break
27 (100)
Base-in to recovery
27 (100)
Base-out to break
27 (100)
Base-out to recovery
27 (100)
Fixation and oculomotor function measures
Fixation stability
NSUCO saccades
27 (100)
NSUCO pursuits
27 (100)

33 (97)
34 (100)
31 (91)

17 (100)
17 (100)
16 (94)

9 (100)
9 (100)
9 (100)

7 (88)
8 (100)
6 (75)

34 (100)
34 (100)
24 (70)

17 (100)
17 (100)
17 (100)

9 (100)
9 (100)
4 (44)

8 (100)
8 (100)
3 (38)

34 (100)
33 (97)

17 (100)
17 (100)

9 (100)
9 (100)

8 (100)
7 (88)

32 (94)
31 (91)

17 (100)
17 (100)

9 (100)
8 (89)

6 (75)
6 (75)

33 (97)
33 (97)

17 (100)
16 (94)

9 (100)
9 (100)

7 (88)
8 (100)

33 (97)
32 (94)

16 (94)
16 (94)

9 (100)
8 (89)

8 (100)
8 (100)

32 (94)
30 (88)
33 (97)
31 (91)

16 (94)
16 (94)
16 (94)
16 (94)

9
8
9
9

(100)
(89)
(100)
(100)

7 (88)
6 (75)
8 (100)
6 (75)

33 (97)
33 (97)
33 (97)

16 (94)
17 (100)
17 (100)

9 (100)
9 (100)
9 (100)

8 (100)
7 (88)
7 (88)

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

40 Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.
TABLE 3.

Number (and percentage) of patients tested with each speciﬁc
clinical test for visual acuity at distance and near and
stereoacuity, by ASD communication level
Communication level, n (%)
Clinical measure

Verbal
(n = 17)

Visual acuity testVdistance
Snellen
16 (94)
Lea crowded symbol
1 (6)
Could not complete
0
Visual acuity testVnear
ETDRS
13 (76)
Lea
4 (24)
Could not complete
0
Stereoacuity
Randot Stereotest
11 (65)
Random Dot E
6 (35)
Lang I
0
Could not complete
0

Uses short
words (n = 9)

Nonverbal
(n = 8)

4 (44)
5 (56)
0

4 (50)
4 (50)
0

2 (22)
7 (78)
0

2 (25)
4 (50)
2 (25)

9 (100)
0
0
0

3
1
3
1

(38)
(12)
(38)
(12)

however, showed that the specific test used to determine visual
acuity at distance was dependent on communication level (p values =
0.01; Table 3). Of the 17 patients with ASD described as verbal by
their parents, 16 (94%) were able to complete distance visual acuity
testing using the Snellen chart, whereas 1 patient (6%) needed the
Lea Crowded Symbol Book and response card (Table 3). Of the 9
patients with ASD described as using short words, distance visual
acuity was determined using the Snellen chart for 4 patients (44%),
whereas the Crowded Symbol Book and response card was necessary
for 5 patients (56%). For the 8 patients with ASD described as
nonverbal, 4 (50%) were tested using the Snellen chart and 4 (50%)
were tested using the Crowded Symbol Book and response card.
As with distance visual acuity, both binocular and monocular
near visual acuity measurements were obtained from all TD patients while testability ranged from 91 to 94% among ASD patients. In addition, testability of binocular near visual acuity was
associated with communication level in the group of ASD patients
(p = 0.032). Although binocular visual acuity at near could be
obtained from all ASD patients who were verbal or used short
words, only 75% of the nonverbal patients could complete the
test. Intraocular pressure was obtained on all ASD verbal patients,
but it was obtained on only 44% of those who communicate using
short words and on 38% of the nonverbal patients.
Unlike distance visual acuity, the test required to obtain near
visual acuity depended on patient type (p = 0.002). All TD patients were tested using the ETDRS chart, whereas only 24 of 34
(70%) ASD patients were able to respond to that specific test. In
addition, the test used for ASD patients was significantly associated with communication level (p = 0.004). Like TD patients,
most verbal ASD patients (76%) were tested using the ETDRS
compared with only 22% of ASD patients described as using short
words and 25% of nonverbal ASD patients.

Testability of Binocular Vision Measures
Testability of both sensory and motor fusion tests was generally
good to excellent for both ASD and TD groups. Stereoacuity

measurements were obtained from all TD patients and 33 of 34
(97%) ASD patients. The one ASD patient who could not be
tested was described as nonverbal. Although testability of ASD
patients was not related to communication level, the specific test
required was related to method of communication (p = 0.002;
Table 3). The Randot Stereotest was used to measure stereoacuity
for all 9 patients described as using short words to communicate,
11 of the 17 (65%) verbal ASD patients, and 3 of the 8 (38%)
nonverbal ASD patients. The remaining 6 ASD patients described
as verbal were tested using the Random Dot E stereotest. Testability for NPC and near fusional vergence again was excellent for
TD patients and slightly reduced for ASD patients ranging from
88 to 97%; however, these differences between the TD and ASD
groups were not statistically significant (p values 9 0.06). In addition,
testability for ASD patients for NPC and near fusional vergence
was not related to verbal communication level (p values 9 0.15).

Testability of Eye Movement Measures
Fixation stability was obtained from all patients except for one
ASD patient described as verbal (Table 2). Similarly, NSUCO
saccades and NSUCO pursuits were obtained for all except one
nonverbal ASD patient. As with tests of binocular vision, testability was not related to communication level.

DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to design an eye examination protocol
that would be successful for patients with ASD and to compare the
testability of vision tests and eye tests using this protocol for patients with ASD to that of TD peers. Autism spectrum disorder
patients have multiple challenges in social interaction, communication, making transitions, and sensory processing. When vision
testing was integrated with communication and sensory processing supports and behavioral strategies, the proportion of ASD
patients able to complete vision testing was generally high.
The results of this study were compared with those reported in
other prospective studies of vision assessment in ASD patients
(Table 4). Using the enhanced protocol designed for this study,
the proportion of ASD patients able to complete testing generally
exceeded that reported by other investigators. This difference is
particularly true for stereoacuity, oculomotor testing, and near
fusional vergence testing. The testability of visual acuity testing in
this study is also higher than Ikeda et al.’s report34 by retrospective
record where only 40% of ASD patients completed recognition
visual acuity. Testability is an important aspect of clinical and
research data collection. Future clinical investigators may consider
the supports and strategies used and the interdisciplinary collaboration of the study team in creating research protocols.
Testing a patient’s vision and eye health cannot be performed
without considering a patient’s development, abilities, and challenges in other areas. Understanding the patient’s ability to communicate, attend to, and respond to testing is important in selecting
and administering tests in an eye examination. If the purpose of the
vision testing is to gain information from patients with ASD, testing
needs to be tailored to these patients’ differences and then evaluated
for its usefulness. Testing that excludes significant numbers of patients of this population or subgroups within it, because they cannot

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

41

TABLE 4.

Comparison of testability in prospective studies of children and/or adolescents with ASD
Study
N
Age of ASD patients, y
ASD diagnostic criteria used
Visual acuity and refractive error
Visual acuity

Refractive error
Ocular motility
Oculomotor

OKN response

Scharre and Creedon 19929

Milne et al. 20098

Coulter et al. 2014

34
2Y11
DSM-III

51
8Y18
DSM-IV

34
9Y17
DSM-IV

Binocular visual acuity by
Teller cards Forced
Preferential Looking-2
trials 33/34 (97%)
Near retinoscopy
33/34 (97%)

Distance monocular visual
acuity crowded logMAR
test then Kay picture or
Ffooks 41/51 (80%)
Not attempted

Distance monocular visual
acuity Snellen then Lea
symbol 33/34 (97%)

Pursuits5/34 (15%)

Pursuits in eight fields
of gaze 44/51 (86%)

NSUCO fixation 33/34 (97%)

OKN drum horizontal and
vertical 34/34 (100%)
Unilateral cover test
34/34 (100%)

Ocular alignment
Binocular vision
Stereotest

Lang 16/34 (47%)

Near point of convergence
Fusional vergence at near

Other near tests
Binocular near visual acuity
Accommodative response

Not attempted
Not attempted

Not attempted
Not attempted

OKN drum horizontal
and vertical 41/51 (80%)
Unilateral cover test
47/51 (92%)
Frisby stereotest 37/51 (72%)

Distance retinoscopy 33/34 (97)

NSUCO pursuits33/34 (97%)
NSUCO saccades31/34 (91%)
Not attempted
Unilateral and alternating
cover test 33/34 (97%)

NPC 44/51 (86%)
Base-in 32/51 (72%)

Random Dot 2, Random
Dot E, Lang 33/34 (97%)
NPC 332/34 (94%)
Base-in 30/34 (88%)

Base-out (tested once)
32/51 (63%)

Base-out (tested three times)
31/34 (91%)

Not attempted
Not attempted

ETDRS or Lea 30/34 (88%)
Monocular estimated method
retinoscopy 31/34 (91%)

DSM-III, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition; DSM-IV, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition; logMAR, logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution; OKN, optokinetic nystagmus.

complete the tests, yields data that are incomplete and skewed and
may not accurately reflect the patient population’s visual status. Before
investigators or clinicians can determine the frequency and nature of
vision problems found in patients with ASD, they need to consider
how these patients’ challenges in communication, sensory processing,
and motor planning impact the testing being administered.
Using strategies and protocols that target the developmental level
of a specific population is not new to vision testing. Infant vision
testing became more productive when Teller35 developed infant vision testing by forced-choice preferential looking and grating patterns
using the observation that TD infants preferred to look at patterned
stimuli over homogenous gray stimuli. Fulton et al.36 demonstrated
that as testability of infants increased with the use of Forced Preferential Looking, the identification of patients who had decreased
vision as a result of strabismus or cataracts improved. By considering
ASD patients’ developmental level and abilities, investigators will be
better able to select tests, design eye examination protocols, and diagnose and manage patients with vision and eye health problems.
Good clinicians may intuitively use some of the strategies identified such as selecting tests to avoid tactile defensiveness, shaping
a desired response, following a high probability request with a
low one, presenting desired behaviors framed as choices, or using

distraction techniques to increase tolerance to unpleasant stimuli.
Other tools, such as the use of a visual schedule, social story, or the
yes/no application, may be relatively unknown. In either case, working
toward a more systematic approach to examining ASD patients may
be helpful for those investigating aspects of vision or those who
provide comprehensive vision and eye care. Understanding why
certain approaches work may also be useful in the training of current
and future eye care providers. Our results show that these strategies
and tools are not difficult for clinicians to implement.
Incorporation of these strategies and tools offers advantages
to patients as well. By increasing patients’ understanding of the
testing process and how they can participate in it, clinicians and
investigators can decrease patient and parent anxiety and lay the
groundwork for future visits. This may ultimately increase their
access to quality vision and eye care.

Which Test Worked and for Whom
Testability for vision and eye tests varied greatly for ASD patients by the level of verbal communication reported by the
parents. Although the parent-reported verbal communication
level is not a standardized measure of language, it quickly provides

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

42 Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

needed information to the eye care provider. All the ASD and TD
patients were able to do binocular distance visual acuity testing;
however, the tests that the patients responded to differed by ASD
subgroup (p = 0.0021). For ASD patients who were described as
verbal, testability results were very similar to the TD population.
In testing visual acuity, almost all patients who were fluent were
able to complete the Snellen acuity chart. In comparison, only half
of the patients who used short words or who were nonverbal were
able complete the Snellen acuity chart. In testing stereoacuity,
most patients who were fluent or had some words could complete
the Random Dot 2 test. Nonverbal patients were generally able to
complete a stereotest, if it was presented in a forced-choice presentation or did not require wearing Polaroid goggles. In this study,
testability varied most for tonometry. Tonometry was particularly
challenging for nonverbal patients. As these patients mature into
adulthood and their risk for glaucoma increases, there will be a need
for alternative ways to measure IOP or other types of testing and/or
protocols that can detect early glaucomatous changes.
Few studies have reported the findings of their ASD patients by
functional subgroups. Milne et al.8 reported the vision screening
results by subgroups based on IQ testing results. High-functioning
subjects were defined as those who had IQ test results higher than
or equal to 100, whereas LF patients were those with IQ lower than or
equal to 100 or whose IQ was untestable. In this study, testability for
HF subjects was generally high: visual acuity, 97%; stereoacuity, 86%;
prism fusional vergence, 66%; and NPC, 100%. Testability for LF
subjects was marked lower: visual acuity, 60%; stereoacuity, 40%;
prism fusional vergence, 27%; and NPC, 80%.
Our ASD patient subgroups were based on parent report of
verbal communication levels and not measured IQ test results.
This required the parent to make a judgment about his or her
child’s ability. Although this determination is a practical and easy
method for eye care providers, it is not based on a standardized
questionnaire or clinical assessment.
Our testability results, particularly those from less verbal patients, compare favorably with those reported by Milne et al.8 We
suggest that consideration of test selection, examination strategies,
and supports are particularly important for ASD patients who are
less verbal or less able to respond to conventional testing techniques, as their findings may be most likely to be eliminated from
scientific study otherwise.
Eye care providers need to determine guidelines for eye examination testing for patients with ASD protocols. In future
studies and investigations, testability of the vision and eye tests
used needs to be considered. Vision testing, screening, and eye
examination studies that eliminate up to 30 to 60% of the patients
with ASD tested do not accurately reflect visual status or functional abilities of the ASD population.
It is also important to acknowledge the diversity of the ASD
population. The wide range of abilities found in this population
may mean that multiple protocols are needed to accommodate
patients of differing abilities. Current investigation of the ASD
population aims to identify phenotypes of patients who are more
similar. In the meantime, clinicians need clinical classifications
that communicate a patient’s profile quickly and do not require
access to additional testing or documentation. Parental report of
verbal communication may be a reasonable starting point as long
as clinicians understand the limitations of this designation.

Limitations
It is important to note the limitations of this study when considering its application to clinical practice. The study sample of
patients with ASD reflected an atypical sex distribution. The ratio
of male to female typically found in the ASD population is 4:1; in
this study, it was 10:7. This may reflect a bias on the part of the
parents who chose to enroll their child and to participate. Sex was
not related to the testability of any of our eye examination procedures (p values 9 0.05; data not shown).
Another study limitation is the older age range of patients who
were 9 to 17 years at the time of testing. Patients with ASD whose
parents reported their verbal communication level as verbal showed
vision and eye test completion at rates similar to those of TD patients. Patients with ASD who are younger than 9 years and who
have not yet completed years of early intervention, speech, and
occupational therapy or educational programs may show lower
testability rates on vision and eye tests. Finally, our study administered cycloplegic and mydriatic agents in a spray administration. It
is possible that eye drop administration of these same agents to
obtain a more controlled cycloplegia might negatively impact testability for ocular health examination and cycloplegic refraction.

CONCLUSIONS
In summary, the results of this study are as follows:
1. Most patients with ASD including those who are nonverbal
can complete most vision tests within an eye examination
using a protocol that incorporates visual, communication,
and sensory supports.
2. It is not that difficult to incorporate the appropriate protocols
to allow for successful testing of patients with ASD. Most can
be implemented with relatively little additional time or resources by the examiner.
3. Testability of near binocular visual acuity and IOPs varies for
ASD patients by the level of verbal communication reported
by the parent.
4. Testability of IOPs is reduced, particularly for nonverbal
patients and patients who used short words. Future research is
needed to refine examination procedures and investigate treatment implementation in this patient population.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to all participants and their parents and caregivers. We thank
Michael Alessandri, PhD, and the NSU-CARD staff, Broward County
Public Schools, Westlake Academy, CasaBlanca Academy, and Tania DiazFernandez, MOT, for their assistance in patient recruitment. We thank
Darryl M. Horn, PhD, for comments that greatly improved this article. This
work was supported by a Nova Southeastern University Chancellor’s Faculty
Research & Development Grant and a Nova Southeastern University Health
Professions Division Grant. This work has been presented in part at the
American Academy of Optometry (Phoenix, AZ, 2012) and the International
Meeting for Autism Research (San Sebastian, Spain, 2013).
Received February 28, 2014; accepted July 29, 2014.

REFERENCES
1. Autism Spectrum Disorders: Data and statistics. Atlanta: Division of
Birth Defects, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Eye Testing of Children with AutismVCoulter et al.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

Disabilities, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2014.
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/data.html. Accessed
March 27, 2014.
Trager MJ, Dirani M, Fan Q, Gazzard G, Selvaraj P, Chia A, Wong
TY, Young TL, Varma R, Saw SM. Testability of vision and refraction in preschoolers: the strabismus, amblyopia, and refractive
error study in Singaporean children. Am J Ophthalmol 2009;148:
235Y41 e6.
Kulp MT, Dobson V, Peskin E, Quinn G, Schmidt P. The electronic
visual acuity tester: testability in preschool children. The Vision in
Preschoolers (VIP) Study Group. Optom Vis Sci 2004;81:238Y44.
Cotter SA, Tarczy-Hornoch K, Wang Y, Azen SP, Dilauro A,
Borchert M, Varma R. Visual acuity testability in African-American
and Hispanic children: the Multi-Ethnic Pediatric Eye Disease
Study. Am J Ophthalmol 2007;144:663Y7.
Schmidt PP, Maguire MG, Moore B, Cyert L. Testability of preschoolers on stereotests used to screen vision disorders. Vision in
Preschoolers Study Group. Optom Vis Sci 2003;80:753Y7.
Tarczy-Hornoch K, Lin J, Deneen J, Cotter SA, Azen SP, Borchert
MS, Wang Y, Varma R. Stereoacuity testability in African-American
and Hispanic pre-school children. Optom Vis Sci 2008;85:158Y63.
Pai AS, Rose KA, Samarawickrama C, Fotedar R, Burlutsky G,
Varma R, Mitchell P. Testability of refraction, stereopsis, and other
ocular measures in preschool children: the Sydney Paediatric Eye
Disease Study. J AAPOS 2012;16:185Y92.
Milne E, Griffiths H, Buckley D, Scope A. Vision in children and
adolescents with autistic spectrum disorder: evidence for reduced
convergence. J Autism Dev Disord 2009;39:965Y75.
Scharre JE, Creedon MP. Assessment of visual function in autistic
children. Optom Vis Sci 1992;69:433Y9.
Sterling-Turner HE, Jordan SS. Interventions addressing transition
difficulties for individuals with autism. Psychol Schools 2007;44:
681Y90.
Cafiero JM, Meyer A. Your child with autism: when is augmentative
and alternative communication (AAC) an appropriate option? Except Parent 2008;38:28Y30.
Sughrue K (Producer). Apps for Autism. 60 Minutes [television
broadcast]. Washington, DC: CBS News; Oct. 23, 2011.
Answers:YesNo [iOS app]. Simplified Touch; 2011.
Cohen M, Sloan DL. Visual Supports for People with Autism: A
Guide for Parents and Professionals. Bethesda, MD: Woodbine
House; 2007.
Ingersoll B, Dvortcsak A. Teaching Social Communication to
Children with Autism. New York: The Guilford Press; 2010.
Gray C. The New Social Story Book: Illustrated Edition, 2nd ed.
Arlington, TX: Future Horizons Inc.; 2000.
Test DW, Richter S, Knight V, Spooner F. A comprehensive review
and meta-analysis of the social stories literature. Focus Autism Other
Dev Disabl 2011;26:49Y62.
Briody J, McGarry K. Using social stories to ease children’s transitions. Young Children 2005;60:38Y42.
Backman B, Pilebro C. Augmentative communication in dental
treatment of a nine-year-old boy with Asperger syndrome. ASDC J
Dent Child 1999;66:419Y20.
Daly DA, Gill JM, Cullinane CG, Hourihane JO. Using social
stories to prepare children with autism for allergy testing. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2010;125:AB51.

43

21. Visiting Nate and Franc. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North
Carolina School of Medicine, Division of Occupational Science and
Occupational Therapy, 2014. Available at: http://www.med.unc.edu/
ahs/ocsci/sep/sep-image-and-files/EEGSocialStory.pdf. Accessed May
27, 2014.
22. ATN/AIR-P Blood Draw Tool Kit. Nashville, TN: Autism Speaks
Autism Treatment Network, 2011. Available at: http://www.autismspeaks.org/
science/resources-programs/autism-treatment-network/tools-you-canuse/blood-draw-toolkits. Accessed May 27, 2014.
23. Scattone D, Wilczynski SM, Edwards RP, Rabian B. Decreasing
disruptive behaviors of children with autism using social stories.
J Autism Dev Disord 2002;32:535Y43.
24. Banda DR, Grimmett E, Hart SL. Activity schedules: helping students with autism spectrum disorders in general education classes
manage transition issues. Teach Except Child 2009;41:16Y21.
25. Quill KA. Instructional considerations for young children with autism: the rationale for visually cued instruction. J Autism Dev Disord
1997;27:697Y714.
26. Myles BS, Grossman BG, Aspy R, Henry SA, Coffin AB. Planning a
comprehensive program for students with autism spectrum disorders
using evidence-based practices. Educ Train Dev Disab 2007;42:
398Y409.
27. Schall CM, McDonough JT. Autism spectrum disorders in adolescence and early adulthood: characteristics and issues. J Vocat Rehab
2010;32:81Y8.
28. First Then Visual Schedule [app]. Good Karma Applications; 2011.
29. Simmons DR, Robertson AE, McKay LS, Toal E, McAleer P, Pollick
FE. Vision in autism spectrum disorders. Vision Res 2009;49:
2705Y39.
30. Robertson AE, Simmons DR. The relationship between sensory
sensitivity and autistic traits in the general population. J Autism Dev
Disord 2013;43:775Y84.
31. Berument SK, Rutter M, Lord C, Pickles A, Bailey A. Autism
screening questionnaire: diagnostic validity. Br J Psychiatry 1999;
175:444Y51.
32. Bartlett JD, Jaanus SD, (Eds). Clinical Ocular Pharmacology, 5th ed.
St. Louis, MO: Butterworth-Heinemann Elsevier; 2008.
33. Wong CY, Fan DS, Yu CB, Lam DS. Topical mydriatic and
cycloplegic spray for Chinese children. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus 2003;40:349Y52.
34. Ikeda J, Davitt BV, Ultmann M, Maxim R, Cruz OA. Brief report:
incidence of ophthalmologic disorders in children with autism.
J Autism Dev Disord 2013;43:1447Y51.
35. Teller DY. The forced-choice preferential looking procedure: a
psychophysical technique for use with human infants. Infant Behav
Dev 1979;2:135Y53.
36. Fulton AB, Manning KA, Dobson V. Infant vision testing by a
behavioral method. Ophthalmology 1979;86:431Y9.

Rachel Anastasia Coulter
College of Optometry
Nova Southeastern University
3200 S University Dr
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33328
e-mail: staceyco@nova.edu

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 92, No. 1, January 2015

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

