See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/257732670

Research in Optometry: A challenge and a chance
Article in Journal of Optometry · October 2011
DOI: 10.1016/S1888-4296(11)70051-6

CITATIONS

READS

4

509

1 author:
David P Pinero
University of Alicante
337 PUBLICATIONS 5,022 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Keratoconus View project

Clinic res View project

All content following this page was uploaded by David P Pinero on 06 October 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

J Optom. 2011;4(4):115-116
Journal

Journal
of

Optometry

of

Optometry

P e e r- r e v i e w e d J o u r n a l o f t h e

Spanish General Council of Optometry

ISSN: 1888-4296

O c t o b e r- D e c e m b e r 2 0 1 1 | Vo l . 4 | n . 4

Editorial

115

Research in Optometry: A challenge and a chance
D.P. Piñero

Case Reports

117
122

Herpes-zoster virus ophthalmicus as presenting sign of HIV disease
Udo Ubani

Contact-lens-related microbial keratitis: case report and review
Mark Eltis

Original Articles

128
134
140
147

The new numbers contrast sensitivity chart for contrast sensitivity measurement
Bharkbhum Khambhiphant, Wasee Tulvatana, Mathu Busayarat

Contrast sensitivity evaluation with filter contact lenses in patients with retinitis pigmentosa: a pilot study
G. Carracedo, J. Carballo, E. Loma, G. Felipe, I. Cacho

Corneal thickness measurements with the Concerto on-board pachymeter
Hassan Hashemi, Shiva Mehravaran, Farhad Rezvan, Sara Bigdeli, Mehdi khabazkhoob

Accuracy of Visante and Zeiss-Humphrey Optical Coherence Tomographers
and their cross calibration with optical pachymetry and physical references
Jyotsna Maram, Luigina Sorbara, Trefford Simpson

www.journalofoptometry.org
www.journalofoptometry.org
J Optom is Indexed in the Following Database & Search Engines:
CrossRef, Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ), Google Scholar
Index Copernicus, National Library of Medicine Catalog (NLM Catalog), SCImago Journal Rank and SciVerse Scopus

EDITORIAL

Research in Optometry: A challenge and a chance
Investigación en optometría: un reto y una oportunidad

In the last years, the number of optometrists publishing
research works in journals with high impact factor has
increased significantly. However, this increase in the
quantity of researchers in Optometry has not been
accompanied by a growing number of scienti c journals on
Optometry. There is still the habit of sending scientific
optometric manuscripts to high-factor Ophthalmology
journals with the aim of obtaining a better recognition of
the efforts performed by the researchers and achieving a
more significant spreading of the scientific content. This
facilitates the consolidation of a great amount of
Ophthalmology journals, a growing number of journals in
the eld and subsequently a stagnation or even reduction of
the impact factor of the limited number of scientific
journals in Optometry 1,2. Optometry researchers need
recognized journals where reporting the outcomes of their
investigations. This is one of the aims of Journal of
Optometry, the scienti c peer-reviewed publication of the
Spanish General Council of Optometrists.
Several European journals on vision and Ophthalmology
are currently available. Each year they published a lot of
articles that show the results of Optometric investigations,
such as the developments of new tests for measuring visual
acuity or contrast sensitivity, the validation of several
diagnostic devices that are mainly used by optometrists,
epidemiologic studies about refractive errors, the
characterization of ocular aberrations in different types of
populations, changes in binocular vision after some
refractive surgery treatments, or the analysis of the
outcomes with specific types of contact lenses. All this
research is the result of our knowledge, with or without the
input of other scienti c areas. Therefore, it seems more
coherent to fit all this scientific content in Optometry
journals. The problem arises when attempting to find an
Optometry journal in Europe with impact factor. American
and Australian institutions are the most productive centers
of optometric research and receive the highest average
number of citations/year3. Furthermore, the highest impact

factor of Optometry journals corresponds to two journals
from United States of America (USA) and New Zealand,
respectively (Optometry and Vision Science / Clinical and
Experimental Optometry)4. We are working hard from the
Journal of Optometry in the attempt of developing a high
quality journal on Optometry that may be a reference of the
European Optometry. However, to achieve this aim raw
material is needed, researches in Optometry.
The research is a challenge and a chance to show everyone
the scientific potential of optometrists. It allows us to
improve our clinical procedures and protocols, to implement
functional therapies, to expand our knowledge. Research is
the future of our profession; it will lead us to an even higher
recognition and to a better professional position; it will lead
us to a more optimized clinical practice. Research is the
result of the power of our knowledge and also a source for
new inspiration and advances. If we do our own research we
are by de nition the leaders in all of those efforts, from the
bench to the chair side. Therefore, the development of
Optometry research is a critical factor for the future of our
profession. The support from governments and universities
for Optometry research is crucial in the same manner that
the research in other sciences is supported5,6. Furthermore,
we need our platform for reporting our research, more
journals with impact factor in Optometry.
Optometrist researchers should contribute to Optometry
journals in order to make them greater, to increase the
impact factor of the current available journals, and to
develop our profession. One excellent opportunity for this
contribution to Optometry research and to show our great
potential is the next Special Issue of Journal of Optometry
(July-September 2012). This issue entitled “New
technologies and diagnostic tools in Optometry” will
provide an overview of recent researches about the
development, validity, and clinical applicability evaluation
of new technologies in the context of our profession.
International leading scientists in the Optometry eld will
participate as Topical Editor (Sitiris Plainis, Greece) and

1888-4296/$ - see front matter © 2011 Spanish General Council of Optometry. Published by Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

116
Guest Editors (Alejandro Cerviño, Spain, and Hema
Radhakrishnan, UK) in this important issue. Submission
deadline for this issue is 31st March 2012.
There are still thousands of questions without answer in
Optometry that represents our future and the advance of
vision care. The luxury of getting to answer those questions
makes for a great job and ultimately a great profession of
Optometry.
The Optometry lives in its own research.

References
1. Cartwright VA, McGhee CN. Ophthalmology and vision science
research. Part 1: understanding and using journal impact factors
and citation indices. J Cataract Refract Surg. 2005;31:1999-2007.
2. Sims JL, McGhee CN. Citation analysis and journal impact factors
in ophthalmology and vision science journals. Clin Experiment
Ophthalmol. 2003;31:14-22.

View publication stats

D.P. Piñero
3. Efron N, Brennan NA, Nichols JJ. Citation analysis of the contact
lens eld. Optom Vis Sci. 2011 Nov 2 [Epub ahead of print].
4. Collin HB. Clinical and experimental optometry has an impact.
Clin Exp Optom. 2009;92:410-1.
5. Myers KJ. Optometry research. Part 1: funding sources. Optom
Vis Sci. 1992;69:728-38.
6. Myers KJ. Optometry research. Part 2: grants received. Optom
Vis Sci. 1992;69:815-25.

David P. Piñero
Associate Editor-in-Chief of Journal of Optometry
Department of Optics, Pharmacology and Anatomy,
University of Alicante, Spain
Department of Ophthalmology (Oftalmar),
Medimar International Hospital, Alicante, Spain
Scienti c coordinator of the Foundation
for the Visual Quality, Alicante, Spain
E-mail: david.pinyero@ua.es

