EDITORIAL

Scleral Contact Lenses: Past and Future
editor, Dr. Andrew Pucker, and our team of guest editors who
helped bring this feature issue to life: Dr. Melissa Barnett, Dr. Muriel
Schornack, Dr. Langis Michaud, and Editorial Board Member, Dr.
James Wollfsohn.
Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/optvissci by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 10/31/2020

FIGURE 1. Wide-angle Hapticon diagnostic lenses.

While relocating to Houston recently, I came across some artifacts
I have collected over the years, and one of those found items was a
wide-angle Braff Hapticon diagnostic scleral lens fitting set manufactured by Calcon Laboratories (Fig. 1). What is interesting about this
diagnostic fitting set is its connection to the history of scleral lenses
(version 1.0).
It turns out that this fitting set was born of the work of a pioneer
in scleral contact lens fitting, Dr. Solon Braff. Dr. Braff was a University of California Berkeley Optometry graduate from 1937 who
began fitting lenses in the early 1940s. Dr. Braff is a member of
the Berkeley Optometry Hall of Fame, and there is a nice historical
record of his contributions to the profession told on the University
of California Berkeley alumni website: https://optometry.berkeley.
edu/alumni/hall-of-fame/solon-m-braff/.
One of Dr. Braff's contributions to scleral lens fitting was developing
techniques with dental alginates to mold the eye without anesthesia,
making it possible for optometrists to fit scleral lenses. He went on to define the field for others developing clinical and laboratory techniques,
writing, publishing, and educating along the way. His contributions
to the optometric literature were invaluable to others who followed.
While scleral contact lenses are not a new idea, they are currently
reinvigorating contact lens practice. In 2019, Contact Lens Spectrum
reported that the global contact lens market was estimated to be about
$9 billion with a 5 to 6% projected growth rate. Scleral contact lenses
were estimated to be only 3% of that market. Nevertheless, as you will
find in this feature issue, there is a lot of energy in this field and new
applications are happening frequently. Nevertheless, there remain
some clinical anatomical and physiological challenges to scleral contact
lens success, and that is the focus of this feature issue: to shine a light
on the open questions, bring new evidence to the field, and stimulate
others to help take up the challenge of advancing scleral contact lenses.
What the authors of this feature issue contribute now will help address
the many current questions in this clinical area. I thank the lead guest
www.optvissci.com

Andrew D. Pucker, OD, PhD, FAAO, FSLS

Dr. Pucker earned his OD, MS, and PhD degrees from The Ohio
State University, and he is currently an assistant professor at the
University of Alabama at Birmingham. Dr. Pucker has been the
principal investigator of a National Eye Institute–funded project related to myopia development, and he currently manages other projects related to refractive error, dry eye, and contact lenses. He is a
diplomate of the American Academy of Optometry and a fellow of
the Scleral Lens Education Society. He has also received a number
of other honors, which include the American Academy of
Optometry's Irvin M. and Beatrice Borish Award in 2019.
Dr. Melissa Barnett is a principal optometrist at the University of
California, Davis Eye Center. She is an internationally recognized
key opinion leader, specializing in dry eye disease and specialty
contact lenses. She is a fellow of the American Academy of Optometry and a fellow of the British Contact Lens Association, and she
serves on the board of the American Optometric Association's Contact Lens and Cornea Council, the Gas Permeable Lens Institute,
and the International Society of Contact Lens Specialists. Dr.
Barnett is a past president of The Scleral Lens Education Society.
Drs. Melissa Barnett and Lynette Johns authored and edited the
book Contemporary Scleral Lenses: Theory and Application with
the unique perspectives and contributions of international experts.

Optom Vis Sci 2020; Vol 97(9)

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

655

Editorial

Melissa Barnett, OD, FAAO, FSLS, FBCLA

Muriel Moe Schornack, OD, FAAO, FSLS

Dr. Langis Michaud graduated from Université de Montréal (OD in
1986, MSc in 1998). Since 2001, he is working there as a full professor; and since 2020, as the dean. He is a diplomate of the
American Academy of Optometry and a fellow of the British Contact Lens Association, the Scleral Lens Education Society, and the
European Academy of Optometry. He authored more than 90
peer-reviewed articles and has been invited to speak around the world.
He is an editorial board member of the Journal of Contact Lens Research and Science.

Dr. Muriel Schornack received her OD from the Illinois College of Optometry in 1998 and completed a residency in primary eye care at the
Illinois Eye Institute in 1999. Upon completion of her residency, she
joined the staff of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, where she
is currently a consultant in the department of ophthalmology and an
associate professor in the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine. She is a
founding member of the Scleral Lens Education Society and the
Scleral Lenses in Current Ophthalmic Practice Evaluation (SCOPE) research team. Dr. Schornack remains active in scleral lens–related
research activities, with more than 30 peer-reviewed publications.

Langis Michaud, OD, MSc, FAAO, FSLS, FBCLA

James Wolffsohn, BSc, MCOptom, MBA, PhD, FAAO, FBCLA FRSB,
FCOptom

www.optvissci.com

Optom Vis Sci 2020; Vol 97(9)

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

656

Editorial

Dr. Wolffsohn is a member of the editorial board of Optometry
and Vision Science. He holds many distinctions as a leading researcher in contact lenses, myopia, contact lenses, accommodation, refractive technology, and other areas. Dr. Wolffsohn is the
associate vice chancellor of Aston University and an experienced
educator. He has more than 200 peer-reviewed publications, multiple book chapters, patents, and other contributions to the knowledge base of optometry.

www.optvissci.com

This outstanding team of editors is ideally suited to bring you
the latest advances in scleral contact lenses. I hope you will find
their effort valuable and inspiring. Scleral lenses will clearly be a
growing part of the future of contact lens practice.
Michael D. Twa, OD, PhD, FAAO
Editor in Chief
Houston, TX

Optom Vis Sci 2020; Vol 97(9)

Copyright © American Academy of Optometry. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

657

