1040-5488/12/8909-1257/0 VOL. 89, NO. 9, PP. 1257–1264
OPTOMETRY AND VISION SCIENCE
Copyright © 2012 American Academy of Optometry

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test
Ian L. Bailey*, A. Jonathan Jackson†, Hasan Minto‡, Robert B. Greer‡, and Marlena A. Chu§

Downloaded from https://journals.lww.com/optvissci by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 10/31/2020

ABSTRACT
Purpose. Very poor visual acuity often cannot be measured with letter charts even at close viewing distances. The
Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test (BRVT) was developed as a simple test to extend the range of visual acuity measurement beyond the limits of letter charts by systematically simplifying the visual task and using close viewing distances to
achieve large angular sizes. The test has three pairs of hinged cards, 25 cm square. One card-pair has four Single
Tumbling E (STE) optotypes at sizes 100 M, 63 M, 40 M, and 25 M. Another card-pair has four Grating Acuity (GA) targets
at sizes 200 M, 125 M, 80 M, and 50 M. The third card-pair has a test of White Field Projection (WFP) and a test of Black
White Discrimination (BWD). As a demonstration of feasibility, a population of subjects with severe visual impairment
was tested with the BRVT.
Methods. Adults with severe visual impairments from a wide variety of causes were recruited from three different
rehabilitation programs. Vision measurements were made on 54 eyes from 37 subjects; test administration times were
measured.
Results. For this population, letter chart visual acuity could be measured on 24 eyes. Measurements of visual acuity for
STE targets were made for 18 eyes and with GA targets, for two eyes. Five eyes had WFP, and one had BWD. Four had
light perception only. The median testing time with the BRVT was 2.5 min.
Discussion. The BRVT extends the range of visual acuity up to logMAR ⫽ 2.60 (20/8000) for STEs, to logMAR ⫽ 2.90
(20/16,000) for gratings and includes the WFP and BWD tests.
Conclusions. The BRVT is a simple and efficient test of spatial vision that, with 13 increments, extends the range of
measurement from the limits of the letter chart up to light perception.
(Optom Vis Sci 2012;89:1257–1264)
Key Words: visual acuity, low vision, severe visual impairment, clinical tests, visual task complexity

T

he clinical measurement of visual acuity has been made traditionally with a “Snellen chart”1 of optotypes, usually letters, presented at a standard distance (commonly 6 meters
or 20 feet) with the patient’s task being to recognize the letters as
they read down the chart from large letters to small. When the
visual acuity is so poor that the largest optotypes cannot be named,
generally the clinician brings the chart closer to the patient, but
rarely closer than 1 meter. If the largest optotype cannot be read at
the close distance, testing visual acuity with optotypes is abandoned and the usual practice is for the clinician to next ask the
patient to count the fingers on a hand held at a close distance. If the
fingers cannot be counted, the next step is to determine whether

*OD, MS, FAAO
†
PhD, MCOptom, FAAO
‡
OD, FAAO
§
OD
School of Optometry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California,
(ILB, RBG, MAC), Australian College of Optometrists, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia (AJJ), Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland (AJJ), and International Center for Eyecare Education, Islamabad, Pakistan (HM).

the patient can identify when the clinician’s hand is moving. The
procedures for the “Count Fingers” (CF), and “Hand Motion”
(HM) vision tests are not standardized.2 Viewing distances, the
magnitude of HM, and the size of the target hand and its contrast
with respect to the background are rarely mentioned or specified
by clinicians. There is no well-organized or widely accepted process
for extending the range of visual acuity measurement beyond the
limit imposed by the size of the chart’s largest optotypes at the
standard viewing distance. There is no “standard” closest distance
for viewing the “Snellen Chart.” The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test was designed to provide a rational system for quantifying
very poor levels of visual acuity (i.e., spatial vision) with methods
that are simple and easy to apply in any clinical environment, using
reasonably fine systematic increments down to the practical limits
of spatial vision.
Traditionally “Snellen Charts” have one or, sometimes, two
optotypes of the largest size at the top of the charts, and as the
optotypes progressively become smaller from one row to the next,
there are more optotypes per row. The size progression sequence

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 89, No. 9, September 2012

1258

The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test—Bailey et al.

and the spacing between adjacent optotypes can vary significantly
between charts. Bailey and Lovie (1976)3 introduced a set of principles for chart design that ensure that the visual task remains the
same at each size level. This means that size remains the only
significant variable from one size level to the next. Achieving this
standardization of task requires a certain combination of chart
design features. At each size level there must be the same number of
optotypes; the spacings between optotypes and between rows are
proportional to the size of the optotype; and the progression of size
must follow a constant ratio. Care should be taken to ensure that
there are no significant variations in the difficulty of the optotype
sets at the different size levels. Also introduced with these chart
design principles was the method of designating visual acuity
scores in terms of logMAR, the common logarithm of the Minimum Angle of Resolution (MAR). Landolt rings, Tumbling Es,
and most sets of letters that are used as optotypes are constructed so
that the width of the stroke and the spacings between strokes is
one-fifth of the letter height. The MAR is commonly taken to be
the angular size of one-fifth of the height of the optotype and it is
specified in minutes of arc. When the size progression proceeds in
0.10 log unit steps (ratio ⫽ 1.26x) and there are 5 optotypes per
row, then each letter can be assigned a value of 0.02 log units. This
facilitates scoring methods that give extra credit for each additional
optotype3– 6 that is recognized correctly.
Early Treatment of Diabetic Retinopathy (ETDRS) charts7 follow the Bailey-Lovie design principles, and today, most research
studies involving the measurement of visual acuity use the ETDRS
chart. Following the recommendations of the NAS/NRC Committee on Vision, Working group 39,8 the ETDRS chart chose the
family of 10 Sloan letters as its optotype and 4 meters as its standard testing distance. The Sloan letters are C, D, H, K, N, O, R, S,
V, and Z drawn to specific dimensions.8,9 The ETDRS chart has
rows of 5 letters, the spacing of letters within a row is equal to one
letter height, the spacing between one row and the next is equal to
the height of the letters in the smaller row, and the size progression
ratio is equal to 0.1 log unit (⫽ 1.26x). The layout is centerjustified. There are 14 different sizes ranging from the largest size of
40 M-units (58.2 mm) at the top of the chart down to the smallest
size of 2.0 M-units (2.9 mm). At the recommended viewing distance of 4 meters, the visual acuity range is from logMAR 1.00 to
⫺0.30 (20/200 to 20/10, 6/60 to 6/3, 4/40 to 4/2, 0.1 to 2.0).
There are many different visual acuity charts that follow the same
chart design principles but use different optotypes such as Landolt
Rings, Tumbling Es, numbers, pictorial symbols, and characters
and letters from different alphabets.
The ETDRS chart has become the “gold standard.” The recommended protocol provides for shortening the viewing distance to 1
meter when the largest row cannot be read at 4 meters.10 This
extends the range of angular size by a factor of four-fold to logMAR ⫽ 1.60. The visual task on the ETDRS chart is to read across
each row. The largest row and the smallest row on the chart differ
from the other 12 rows in that they have only one neighboring row,
and this makes the visual task easier. Thus, if an acuity score is to
represent performance at a task that is the same at each size level,
the patient should be able to read the top row on the chart and
unable to read the bottom row, and then the visual acuity limit will
lie within the embrace of the chart’s range of sizes.

There are practical upper limits to the angular sizes of individual
optotypes and rows of optotypes. Very large angular sizes require
very large letters and/or very close viewing distances. At close viewing distances, positioning large charts is difficult, and the process
can be claustrophobic and intimidating to the patient. At extremely large angular sizes, head movements or even changes in
body posture can be required to shift attention from one end of the
row to the other, or from one part of a target letter to another. To
extend the range of visual acuity measurement beyond the limits of
the letter chart, it becomes necessary to simplify the visual task, and
to achieve very large angular sizes, very close viewing distances may
be required.
Several automated computer-based tests have been developed
for the purpose of measuring acuity in patients with very low
vision. Bach and his colleagues developed the Freiburg Visual Acuity and Contrast Test (FrACT),11 which is an efficient automated
procedure using single optotypes and selectable psychophysical
protocols for determining visual acuity thresholds. In its original
form, the Landolt Ring was the optotype and subsequent versions
of the test provide the option of using Tumbling Es or letters. The
test also allows the determination of contrast sensitivity. Bittner
and colleagues recently developed a Grating Acuity Test (GAT)
and a Grating Contrast Sensitivity Test,12 with square wave gratings in a 37-cm circular field, with 4 orientation options. To test
other functions of vision, Bach’s group developed the “Basic Assessment of Light and Motion test” (BaLM).13 The BaLM battery
includes a test of basic light perception, requiring identification of
whether the light display is turned on; a test of temporal resolution,
requiring discrimination of double flash from a single flash; a location test, requiring the identification of the location of a large
area of light; and a motion test, requiring identification of the
direction of motion of a large structured pattern. These various
automated tests have been developed for use in clinical trials, and
they have important applications in studies involving prosthetic
vision devices or in other studies concerned with changes in visual
abilities in persons with severe visual impairment.

THE BERKELEY RUDIMENTARY VISION TEST
Our goal was to develop a simple method for testing visual
resolution in patients with very poor vision. We wanted a test that
could quickly provide reasonably precise measures of vision, and
which could easily be used by non-technical support personnel in
almost any setting without requiring power or technological display systems. The test should be an attractive and more quantitative alternative to the counting fingers and hand motion methods
of categorizing visual ability once the clinician has abandoned the
use of the letter chart. For such a test, it is necessary to systematically simplify the visual task and to use very close viewing distances
when the visual resolution abilities become very poor. After considerable experimentation, the Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test
(BRVT) was developed.
Within the BRVT, there is a three-level hierarchy of task complexity.14 Recognition of a single isolated optotype is a less complex visual task than reading across rows of letters on an ETDRS or
similar chart.15,16 The Single Tumbling E (STE)was chosen as the
single optotype for the BRVT because it is easy to administer
regardless of the patient’s language or literacy skills. Only one

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 89, No. 9, September 2012

The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test—Bailey et al.

target is needed at each size and its orientation can easily be
changed. The patient identifies whether the legs of the E point up,
down, right, or left. Compared with the Landolt ring optotype, the
Tumbling E presents a slightly more complex visual task, and it
seems a more natural intermediate step between the letter chart
task and a grating acuity (GA) task. For the recognition of a STE,
localization of visual attention is required and the patient needs to
identify both the orientation of the 3-bar grating component of the
E as well as the location of the cross bar.
The second step in the BRVT sequence of task simplification is to
measure GA. Recognition of grating orientation is a simpler visual task
than recognizing the orientation of a STE. For the grating task, fixation control and localization of the point of attention are relatively
unimportant. The patient simply has to recognize that, somewhere
within the display field, there is a periodic pattern with a discernible
orientation. When the coarsest grating patterns cannot be recognized,
even more basic tests of spatial vision are required.
The third level of task complexity in the BRVT battery is a test
of basic spatial vision function. It tests whether the patient can
detect and localize large white fields and also determines whether
the patient can tell whether a large display field is black or white.
The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test consists of three card
pairs. Each card-pair has two 25-cm square cards hinged together
so that there are four panel faces for each of the three card-pairs.
These are shown in Fig. 1.
The STE card pair is used for measuring visual acuity with single
optotypes. Each STE card-pair has 4 STEs whose sizes in M-units
are 100 M, 63 M, 40 M and 25 M. (in millimeters, 145mm, 92
mm, 58 mm, and 36 mm). The visual task is to identify the direction to which the legs of the E are pointing: up, down, right, or left.
The STE cards are hinged so that when the 100 M and 25 M Es are
on the outside faces, the intermediate 63 M and 40 M Es are on the
inside faces. For these STE targets, the visual acuity demand, the
MAR, is determined by the stroke widths (or the spacing between
parallel strokes) in arc-minutes. For a viewing distance of 100 cm,
the visual acuity demands for these 4 optotypes are, in logMAR
terms, logMAR ⫽ 2.00, 1.80, 1.60, and 1.40 (equivalent to 20/

1259

2000, 20/1250, 20/800, and 20/500). For a viewing distance of 25
cm, the angular sizes increase by 0.6 log units to become logMAR ⫽ 2.60, 2.40, 2.20, and 2.00 (equivalent to 20/8000, 20/
5000, 20/3200, and 20/2000).
The GA card-pair is used for measuring visual acuity with grating targets. The GA card-pair has 4 square-wave gratings of different spatial frequencies, and the gratings fill the area of the 25-cm
square panels. The widths of the black and white stripes on the 4
different graftings are 60, 38, 24, and 15 mm. Similar to the
Tumbling E targets, the stripe widths of the gratings have been
taken to represent the visual acuity demand. For a viewing distance
of 25 cm, the visual acuity values of the four grating targets are
logMAR ⫽ 2.90, 2.70, 2.50 and 2.30 (equivalent to 20/16,000,
20/10,000, 20/6,300, and 20/4,000) The M-unit values given to
the gratings are the distances in meters at which the stripe widths
subtend 1 min of arc, and for these 4 gratings these are 200 M, 125
M, 80 M, and 50 M. For a 25 cm viewing distance, the 25 cm
square test cards subtend an angle of 53°. The patient’s task is to
identify whether the stripes are oriented horizontally or vertically.
The GA cards are hinged so that when the 200 M and 50 M
gratings are on the outside faces, the intermediate 125 M and 80 M
gratings are on the inside.
The Basic Vision card-pair tests two different aspects of basic
spatial vision. There is a test of spatial localization called White
Field Projection (WFP). Two card faces are used for this test. One
card is black with a white quadrant. The other card is divided into
a black half and a white half. The visual task is to identify the
location of the large white area. When presented at 25 cm, the
quad-field subtends 26° ⫻ 26° and the hemi-field area is 26° ⫻
53°. The other test of basic vision function is called Black White
Discrimination (BWD). One of the two card faces is all black, the
other all white. The patient’s task is to tell whether the card being
presented is black or white. With the cards at 25 cm from the eye,
the black and white fields of the BWD test subtend 53° ⫻ 53°. The
Basic Vision card-pair is hinged so that when the quad-field and
hemi-field panels for the WFP test are on the outside, the black and
white panels for the BWD test are on the inside. The WFP and the

FIGURE 1.
The BRVT has three pairs of hinged cards that are 25 cm square.
Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 89, No. 9, September 2012

1260

The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test—Bailey et al.

BWD tests of the Basic Vision card-pair are similar to the basic
light perception test and the location test components of the computer-based BaLM test.13

BRVT Testing Sequence
The testing sequence with the BRVT is simple and intuitive.
The sequence is shown in Fig. 2.
Testing with the BRVT standard protocol begins with the STE
card-pair at a viewing distance of 100 cm. The smallest STE (25
M) is presented first.
If the orientation of the 25 M STE can be readily recognized at
100 cm, then it is likely that visual acuity will be measurable with
an ETDRS chart or similar at 100 cm, given that the largest optotype size on the ETDRS chart (40 M) is larger than the 25 M STE.
If the 25 M STE cannot be recognized at 100 cm, then the 100
M STE is presented at 100 cm. If the 100 M STE can be recognized at 100 cm, then the visual acuity measurement can be completed at 100 cm with the STE card-pair. If the 100 M STE cannot
be recognized at 100 cm, the visual acuity for STEs is less than
logMAR ⫽ 2.0 (equivalent to 20/2000), then the viewing distance
should be reduced to 25 cm. Because the cards are 25 cm square, it
is convenient to use the card itself as a measuring stick to check that
the eye-to-card distance is 25 cm. If the 100 M STE can be recognized at 25 cm, the visual acuity for STEs is at least logMAR ⫽
2.60, (equivalent to 20/8,000), and the visual acuity determination
can be completed with STEs. While the 25 cm viewing distance
does create a ⫹4.00 D accommodation demand, it is not important that adjustments be made to the refractive correction. The
visual acuity demand for the smallest STE target at 25 cm is logMAR ⫽ 2.0. Smith’s analyses17 of defocus and visual acuity indicate
that ⫹4.00 D of error reduces visual acuity only to about logMAR ⫽
1.20. If the 100 M STEs cannot be recognized at 25 cm, then testing
with STEs is abandoned, and the GA card-pair is used next.
The GA test begins with the largest grating (200 M) being
presented at 25 cm. If the grating orientation can be recognized

then the GA is at least logMAR ⫽ 2.90 (equivalent to 20/16,000),
and GA can be measured using the finer grating targets. If the
orientation of coarsest grating target (200 M) cannot be recognized
at 25 cm, then visual acuity measurement is abandoned, and then
the Basic Vision tests card-pair is used.
The Basic Vision Tests are presented at a viewing distance of 25
cm. For the WFP test, the quad-field card and the hemi-field card
should each be shown at least once in each of the 4 card orientations. If the location of the white quad-field or hemi-field cannot
be reliably identified, then the BWD test is administered. If the
patient is unable to discriminate black from white with the BWD
test, then a test of “Light Perception” is conducted using a penlight
shone at the eye from a close distance.

Number of Target Presentations
Initially, there is a screening process in which the clinician
makes a preliminary estimate of the patient’s spatial vision abilities.
Following the sequence described earlier, two presentations are
made with each acuity target (STE or Grating) that is used. Usually
some targets will be very easy to see, and the patient gives quick and
confident correct responses. Other targets may be far too difficult
to see, and then the patient is likely to give a prompt response
indicating that they think this task is impossible. This screening
process provides a quick estimate of the visual threshold and indicates whether testing should proceed with the letter chart, the STE
card-pair, the GA card-pair or the Basic Vision card-pair.
Once an initial estimate has been made through the screening
process, more target presentations are made with the target sizes
concentrated in the region of the patient’s threshold. For the STE
targets, at least four target presentations should be made at each
size level, jumbling the order of the different target orientations.
For four presentations, all four being correctly identified indicates
that the target size is at, or larger than, the visual acuity threshold.
For six or more presentations, a success rate ⬎50% meets this
criterion. For the GA task, at least 6 target presentations should be

FIGURE 2.
The standard testing sequence for using the BRVT for screening to obtain an initial estimate of the patient’s visual abilities. The STE acuity is used at
100 cm for the range STE logMAR ⫽ 1.40 to 2.00, and at 25 cm for STE logMAR ⫽ 2.00 to 2.60. The GA test is used at 25 cm for grating acuities in
the range GA logMAR ⫽ 2.30 to 2.90. The WFP and the BWDB tests are presented at 25 cm.
Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 89, No. 9, September 2012

The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test—Bailey et al.

made at each size. A 100% success rate for 6 presentations, or a
success rate of 80% or better for 8 or more presentations indicate
that the grating is at, or larger than, the visual acuity threshold. The
reliability of the patient’s responses, the clinician’s strategy for
determining threshold, and the precision being sought, all influence the number of additional presentations at the different levels
of angular size. For the WFP test, at least one new presentation
should be made at each of the four orientations for both the quadfield and hemi-field targets. For the BWD test at least 6 presentations should be made.

TESTING VISUALLY IMPAIRED POPULATIONS
WITH THE BRVT METHODS
As a demonstration of the practicality of the BRVT, we tested the
vision of 37 severely visually impaired subjects recruited from the
California School for the Blind, the Orientation Center for the Blind,
and the Lighthouse for the Blind and Visually Impaired in San Francisco. All subjects were adult volunteers who gave informed consent.
The protocols for this study followed the tenets of the Declaration of
Helsinki and were approved by the Committee for the Protection of
Human Subjects of the University of California, Berkeley.
Within their own visually impaired communities, all subjects were
considered to have very poor vision. The 18 subjects from the California School for the Blind were all students and the mean age was
19.8 ⫾ 1.1 years. The 9 subjects from the Orientation Center were all
enrolled in the OCB’s residential rehabilitation program, and the average age was 41.9 ⫾ 15.6 years The 10 visually impaired subjects
from the Lighthouse in San Francisco were either staff members or
clients and the mean age was 40.2 ⫾ 14.9 years. Within each of the 3
groups, there was a wide diversity in the causes of low vision. Optic
nerve atrophy and congenital disorders were predominant in the CSB
group. In the OCB group, the visual impairments were acquired in
adult life, and retinitis pigmentosa, glaucoma, and diabetic retinopathy were the most prevalent disorders. Almost half of the Lighthouse
group had impaired vision since childhood.
A battery of vision tests was completed for all 37subjects. This
included a brief case history and measurements of visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, and visual fields. Note was made of the time taken to
complete the various tests. Only the visual acuity results are reported
here. Most subjects within these groups had access to ocular and vision
care but their medical records were not readily available. Subjects wore
their best available optical distance-vision correction during the testing
and no additional lenses were used for testing at 100 cm or 25 cm. For
17 subjects with dissimilar levels of vision loss in the two eyes, the
visual acuity measurements for both eyes are reported so that the
results come from 54 eyes from 37 subjects.
For most subjects, testing with the BRVT followed the recommended sequence. A few subjects reported that their vision was
“light perception” only, and for them testing began with the Basic
Vision card-pair. When visual acuity was being measured with the
ETDRS letter chart, visual acuity was scored in logMAR units
giving 0.02 log units credit for every additional letter read.3– 6
When visual acuity was being measured with the STE card pair,
testing began at the size estimated by the screening procedure, and
four presentations were made at that size. Subjects were not obliged
to guess but they were encouraged to guess if they were not quite
certain. Systematically larger and smaller sizes were presented to

1261

establish the range over which the success rate extended from 4 of
4 to 1 of 4. For the GATs, the testing established the range over
which the success rate ranged from 6 of 6 to 1 of 6. For the WFP
test, first there were 4 different orientations presented for both the
quad-field and hemi-field cards, and if there was any success (2 of
8 or better), the process was repeated. For the BWD test, there were
at least 4 presentations with both the black and white cards.

RESULTS
The frequency distribution of the visual acuity scores and the
basic vision results are shown in Fig. 3. Visual acuity scores could
be obtained with the letter chart for 24 of the eyes tested. Of these
24, 20 measurements were made with 100 cm viewing distance,
and 4 were made at 4 meters. For 18 eyes, visual acuity was measured with the STE card-pair, with 16 eyes tested at 100 cm with
STE acuities ranging from logMAR ⫽ 1.4 to 2.0, and the 2 eyes
tested at 25 cm had acuities of logMAR ⫽ 2.2 and 2.6. For 12 of
the 54 eyes, visual acuity could not be measured with the letter
chart or the STEs. Two of these had measurable GA with the
logMAR values being 2.3 and 2.7.
Of the 10 eyes for which visual acuity scores could not be obtained, 5 successfully showed WFP, one showed only BWD and 4
eyes had light perception only.
The median time taken to test each eye was 120 s. For letter
chart acuities, the median time was 97 s. For eyes tested with the
BRVT, the median time was 152 s and the average was 171 s.
There was substantial diversity in the testing times. For 12 eyes, the
testing time exceeded 3 min, and for 3 of these, the testing time
exceeded 5 min. Most of the very slow testing times were a result of
impaired motor or communication abilities in some students from
the California School for the Blind.

DISCUSSION
Our subjects were selected because they had been identified as having substantial vision impairments. For over half of the eyes tested, a
visual acuity could not be obtained with a letter chart at 1 meter. In
such circumstances, the common clinical practice is to assess vision
using “Counting Fingers” or “Hand Motion.” The BRVT offers 13
incremental steps for quantifying or characterizing spatial vision abilities when they are beyond the limit of the letter chart but better than
“Light Perception” only. For 26 eyes, the BRVT results were scattered
broadly across this range. Twenty had visual acuity scores from testing
with the STE (n ⫽ 18) or GA (n ⫽ 2) targets. It is reasonable to
assume that all of these would have had either “Count Fingers” or
“Hand Motion” if tested by usual clinical procedures. Because there is
no standard way of performing the tests for CF and HM, visual acuity
scores cannot be used to predict which eyes would be classified as CF
and which would be HM.18,19 There were 6 eyes that showed either
WFP (n ⫽ 5) or BWD (n ⫽ 1), and one would expect that these
would have been classified as having HM but not CF. Four eyes had
light perception only. These results give a practical demonstration that
the BRVT readily provides more increments when assessing spatial
visual abilities beyond the limits of testing with letter charts. The test is
obviously portable, easy to use, and typically it takes ⬍3 min to test an
eye. The visually impaired population used for this study was diverse,
but unique. The results reported here should not be taken as being

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 89, No. 9, September 2012

1262

The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test—Bailey et al.

FIGURE 3.
The frequency distribution of the BRVT results from testing 54 eyes in a population of severely visually impaired adult patients recruited from three
different agencies that serve the blind and visually impaired. Letter chart acuity could be measured on only 24 eyes. Twenty eyes achieved visual acuity
scores with the STE (n ⫽ 18) or GA (n ⫽ 2) targets. These would have normally been classified as either “CF” or “HM.” For six eyes, the vision was
classified as WFP (5) or BWD (1) and these normally would have probably been classified as “HM.” Four eyes had light perception only.

representative of results to be expected in other low vision populations
or subgroups. There are on-going studies to examine test-retest reliability using the BRVT in selected low vision populations and to
compare the results of the BRVT and the FrACT tests.
The sequence of testing at different levels of BRVT is logical
and intuitive. However, the number of presentations made at
each size in both the screening and the measurement phases can
be a matter of choice. For 95% confidence that STE target is
recognized, at least 4 correct out of 6 presentations, or 5 of 8 are
recommended criteria. Because the GA test is a 2-choice task,
more presentations are required and recommended criteria are
at least 7 of 8 or 8 of 10. For research studies, testing procedures
should be more rigidly specified.
Different approaches can be taken for deciding the value that is
taken to be the threshold visual acuity.6 It can be the smallest target
at which the success rate is sufficient to provide a 95% confidence
that targets of that angular size can be recognized. A more analytical and mathematical approach would be to record the success
rates over different size levels and prepare a plot of the probability
of seeing as a function target size. For a 50% probability of seeing,
the success rate for the 4-choice STE test should be at 62.5%, and
for the 2-choice GA test, the required success rate is 75%. A third
alternative is to make the same number of presentations at each size
level, and assign a value to each presentation, and the value will be
equal to the size of the increments divided by the number of presentations.5 For the STE test, the size increments are 0.2 log units
and if there are 8 presentations, the value for each presentation is
0.025 log units. For example, if the STE card pair was presented at
100 cm, the targets sizes available would be logMAR ⫽ 2.00, 1.80,

1.60 and 1.40. If the success rates were respectively 8 of 8, 6 of 8,
3 of 8, 0 of 8, then the logMAR score would become 1.775. This
gives credit for 9 presentations correctly identified after logMAR ⫽
2.00.
The size increments for the STE and GA card-pairs are in steps
of 0.20 log units (size ratio ⫽ 6⫻) and this is a coarser scale than
the 0.1 increments (ratio 1.26⫻) used on the letter charts. Precision can be improved simply by taking more measurements making more presentations at each size in the region of threshold.
Modifying the viewing distance changes the angular size, and careful changes in viewing distance can achieve intermediate angular
sizes and thereby improve measurement precision. For example,
changing the viewing distance from 100 to 80 cm will cause the
angular size of the 100 M STE target to change from a logMAR
value of 2.00 to 2.10. And for the 100 M STE target at 125 cm,
logMAR ⫽ 1.90.
The WFP test only produces a qualitative result, and there is not
a recommended set of criteria or rules for success at the WFP test.
The clinician makes a qualitative judgment as to whether the patient can identify the location of the white areas with reasonable
consistency. One impediment to developing a scoring method is
that for both the quad-field and hemi-field components of the test,
there can be partial successes. For example, if the perfectly correct
response for the quad-field test is up and right, two partially correct
responses would be up or right. For the hemi-field test, if the
perfectly correct response is up, there are 4 partially correct responses, namely, up-right, up-left, left, or right. Fixation is not
constrained during this test, and this can contribute to response
inconsistencies. The practice we recommend is to make one pre-

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 89, No. 9, September 2012

The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test—Bailey et al.

sentation at each of the 4 orientations for both the quad-field and
the hemi-field targets. A very high success rate would indicate that
the patient has very reliable WFP. If there is a moderate success
rate, the clinician might gather an impression that the patient has
some ability to locate the white field when it is located in a given
direction. This hypothesis should then be put to the test by repeating the 8 presentations. The WFP test is passed only when the
clinician becomes convinced that the patient can reliably identify
the location of the white field consistently, at least in one direction.
With the progressive simplification of the tasks in the acuity
tests within the BRVT, it is inevitable that sometimes the logMAR
visual acuity score from a simpler test will be significantly better
than the logMAR value that was failed on the more complex test.
Visual acuity scores should identify the nature of the vision test
task. For example, a patient might not be able to read across the
largest row of five letters at the top of the ETDRS chart at 100 cm
so, on the letter chart, they fail to achieve a Letter Chart logMAR ⫽
2.00. However, the STE presents a much easier task, and the STE
acuity in logMAR terms might be found to be 1.80, 1.60, or even
1.40. Patients with central scotomas and patients with amblyopia
are very like to have significantly better acuities when the target is
an isolated optotype, but how much better is individualistic and
difficult to predict. Similarly, GA targets are only used when the
patient fails to achieve a STE logMAR of 2.60. Because the GA
visual task is much simpler, the acuity with gratings may be significantly better than logMAR ⫽ 2.60 value that was failed with the
STE targets. Some patients who fail the Single Tumbling E acuity
task for STE logMAR ⫽ 2.60 will be able to identify the 80M or
50M GA targets at 25 cm giving GA logMAR scores of 2.50 or
2.30. It sometimes occurs that a patient will be unable to see the
largest STE target at 25 cm (STE logMAR ⫽ 2.60) but able to see
the finest of the grating targets at 25cm (GA logMAR ⫽ 2.30). In
such circumstances, the available range of grating acuities can be
extended by increasing the viewing distance in order to reduce the
angular size of the grating stripes. The 50 M GA target presented at
25 cm has a logMAR value of 2.3, but changing the viewing distance to 40 cm, 63 cm, or 100 cm, (steps of 0.20 log units) will
cause logMAR value for the 50 M GA target to become 2.10, 1.90,
or 1.70, respectively.
With the BRVT, the range of visual acuity measurements made
with the STE targets presented at either 100 cm or 25 cm extends
from STE logMAR ⫽ 1.40 to STE logMAR ⫽ 2.60 (equivalent to
20/500 to 20/8000) in 7 steps of 0.20 log units. The GA test is
presented at 25 cm, and this allows a GA range from GA logMAR ⫽ 2.3 (20/4000) up to GA logMAR ⫽ 2.90 (20/16,000) in
4 steps separated by 0.20 log units. The WFP test and the BWD
add two more qualitative levels of vision between GA logMAR ⫽
2.90 and light perception.
When visual acuity scores are reported, it is important that the
visual task be identified. The visual acuity score on one task is not
necessarily a reliable predictor of the visual acuity scores that would
be obtained on alternative test tasks.14 The computer-based tests
designed to measure very low levels of visual acuity use the one
kind of visual task across a very wide range of sizes. Having one task
for the widest practical range of sizes is critically important for
studies identifying and quantifying changes in acuity, but the task
should be specified as an integral part of reporting the visual acuity
scores. The FrACT test11 usually measures visual acuity for single

1263

Landolt Rings, and the GAT test12 measures visual acuity for gratings. When visual acuity is measured with letter charts, the reports
of results should identify which kind of letter chart was used. With
the BRVT, any visual acuity scores should specify whether they
came from the STE or the GA tests.

CONCLUSIONS
The BRVT is a simple, low-tech, and efficient test for measuring
visual acuities and basic spatial vision in very low vision. It provides
a large number of reasonably fine increments (n ⫽ 13) to cover the
range between the limits of letter chart visual acuity and light
perception. The BRVT should be most valuable for low vision
clinicians, but it could be useful for all optometrists and ophthalmologists who sometimes encounter patients who would otherwise
have their vision recorded as “CF” or “HM.” Recent developments
in prosthetic vision devices and biological interventions20,21 to
restore or enhance vision in persons with profound vision loss have
raised the clinical community’s awareness of the need for better
methods for testing vision at the very poor vision end of the scale.
The BRVT has already found application in the measurement and
classification of vision in athletes participating in sports for the
blind and visually impaired.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Regents of the University of California holds the copyright for the Berkeley
Rudimentary Vision Test. Any royalties will be used to support research in low
vision in the School of Optometry at the University of California, Berkeley.
During this project AJJ was supported by a Northern Ireland Research &
Development Office Sabbatical Grant. MAC received support from a grant to
the School of Optometry from the Bernard A. Newcombe Foundation.
Received February 8, 2012; accepted May 14, 2012.

REFERENCES
1. Snellen H. Letterproeven tot Bepaling der Gezigtsscherpte 1862. (van
der Weijer PW, Utrecht), cited by Bennett AG. Ophthalmic test
types. A review of previous work and discussions on some controversial questions. Br J Physiol Opt 1965;22:238–71.
2. Lim LT, Frazer DG, Jackson AJ. Clinical studies: visual acuities beyond Snellen. Br J Ophthalmol 2008;92:153.
3. Bailey IL, Lovie JE. New design principles for visual acuity letter
charts. Am J Optom Physiol Opt 1976;53:740–5.
4. Bailey IL. Designation of visual acuity in logarithmic units. Optom
Monthly 1980;71:80–5.
5. Bailey IL. Measurement of visual acuity: towards standardization. In:
Baldwin WR, ed. Vision Science Symposium: a Tribute to Gordon
G. Heath. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University, 1988:215–30.
6. Carkeet A, Lee L, Kerr JR, Keung MM. The slope of the psychometric function for Bailey-Lovie letter charts: defocus effects and implications for modeling letter-by-letter scores. Optom Vis Sci 2001;78:
113–21.
7. Ferris FL, 3rd, Kassoff A, Bresnick GH, Bailey I. New visual acuity
charts for clinical research. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;94:91–6.
8. National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council (NAS-NRC),
Committee on Vision. Recommended standard procedures for the clinical measurement and specification of visual acuity: Report of Working
Group 39: 1979. Adv Ophthalmol 1980;41:103–48.
9. Sloan LL. New test charts for the measurement of visual acuity at far
and near distances. Am J Ophthalmol 1959;48:807–13.
10. Age-related Eye Disease Study (AREDS). Manual of Operations:

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 89, No. 9, September 2012

1264

11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

The Berkeley Rudimentary Vision Test—Bailey et al.

2000. Chapter 7: Examination procedures. Available at: https://web.
emmes.com/study/areds/mopfiles/chp7_mop.pdf. Accessed June 14,
2012.
Bach M. The Freiburg Visual Acuity test–automatic measurement of
visual acuity. Optom Vis Sci 1996;73:49–53.
Bittner AK, Jeter P, Dagnelie G. Grating acuity and contrast tests for
clinical trials of severe vision loss. Optom Vis Sci 2011;88:1153–63.
Bach M, Wilke M, Wilhelm B, Zrenner E, Wilke R. Basic quantitative assessment of visual performance in patients with very low vision.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2009;51:1255–60.
Kitchin JE, Bailey IL. Task complexity and visual acuity in senile
macular degeneration. Aust J Optom 1981;63:235–42.
Flom MC, Weymouth FW, Kahneman D. Visual resolution and
contour interaction. J Opt Soc Am 1963;53:1026–32.
Flom MC. Contour interaction and the crowding effect. Prob Optom 1991;3:237–57.
Smith G. Relation between spherical refractive error and visual acuity. Optom Vis Sci 1991;68:591–8.
Schulze-Bonsel K, Feltgen N, Burau H, Hansen L, Bach M. Visual
acuities “hand motion” and “counting fingers” can be quantified with

the Freiburg visual acuity test. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2006;47:
1236–40.
19. Lange C, Feltgen N, Junker B, Schulze-Bonsel K, Bach M. Resolving
the clinical acuity categories “hand motion” and “counting fingers”
using the Freiburg Visual Acuity Test (FrACT). Graefes Arch Clin
Exp Ophthalmol 2009;247:137–42.
20. Chader GJ, Weiland J, Humayun MS. Artificial vision: needs, functioning, and testing of a retinal electronic prosthesis. Prog Brain Res
2009;175:317–32.
21. Schwartz SD, Hubschman JP, Heilwell G, Franco-Cardenas V, Pan
CK, Ostrick RM, Mickunas E, Gay R, Klimanskaya I, Lanza R.
Embryonic stem cell trials for macular degeneration: a preliminary
report. Lancet 2012;379:713–20.

Optometry and Vision Science, Vol. 89, No. 9, September 2012

Ian L. Bailey
University of California, Berkeley
School of Optometry
415 Minor Hall
Berkeley, California 94720-2020
e-mail: ibailey@berkeley.edu

