Review
Article

Erik Cambria
School of Computer Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University
Bebo White
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory,
Stanford University

Jumping NLP Curves: A Review of Natural
Language Processing Research

N

atural language processing
(NLP) is a theory-motivated
range of computational techniques for the automatic analysis and
representation of human language.
NLP research has evolved from the era
of punch cards and batch processing (in
which the analysis of a sentence could
take up to 7 minutes) to the era of
Google and the likes of it (in which
millions of webpages can be processed
in less than a second). This review
paper draws on recent developments in
NLP research to look at the past, present, and future of NLP technology in a
new light. Borrowing the paradigm of
‘jumping curves’ from the field of
business management and marketing
prediction, this survey article reinterprets the evolution of NLP research as
the intersection of three overlapping
curves-namely Syntactics, Semantics,
and Pragmatics Curves- which will
eventually lead NLP research to evolve
into natural language understanding.
I. Introduction

Between the birth of the Internet and
2003, year of birth of social networks
such as MySpace, Delicious, LinkedIn,
and Facebook, there were just a few
dozen exabytes of information on the
Web. Today, that same amount of information is created weekly. The advent of
the Social Web has provided people
with new content-sharing services that
allow them to create and share their
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MCI.2014.2307227
Date of publication:11 April 2014

48

❏ manipulation of recursive, constitu-

ent structures;
❏ acquisition and access of lexical,

semantic, and episodic memories;
❏ control of multiple learning/process-

© BRAND X PICTURES

own contents, ideas, and opinions, in a
time- and cost-efficient way, with virtually millions of other people connected
to the World Wide Web. This huge
amount of information, however, is
mainly unstructured (because it is specifically produced for human consumption) and hence not directly machineprocessable. The automatic analysis of
text involves a deep understanding of
natural language by machines, a reality
from which we are still very far off.
Hither to, online infor mation
retrieval, aggregation, and processing
have mainly been based on algorithms
relying on the textual representation of
web pages. Such algorithms are very
good at retrieving texts, splitting them
into parts, checking the spelling and
counting the number of words. When
it comes to interpreting sentences and
extracting meaningful information,
however, their capabilities are known to
be very limited. Natural language processing (NLP), in fact, requires highlevel symbolic capabilities (Dyer, 1994),
including:
❏ creation and propagation of dynamic
bindings;

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | MAY 2014

ing modules and routing of information among such modules;
❏ grounding of basic-level language
constructs (e.g., objects and actions)
in perceptual/motor experiences;
❏ representation of abstract concepts.
All such capabilities are required to
shift from mere NLP to what is usually
referred to as natural language understanding (Allen, 1987). Today, most of
the existing approaches are still based on
the syntactic representation of text, a
method that relies mainly on word cooccurrence frequencies. Such algorithms
are limited by the fact that they can process only the information that they can
‘see’. As human text processors, we do
not have such limitations as every word
we see activates a cascade of semantically
related concepts, relevant episodes, and
sensory exper iences, all of which
enable the completion of complex
NLP tasks—such as word-sense disambiguation, textual entailment, and
semantic role labeling—in a quick and
effortless way.
Computational models attempt to
bridge such a cognitive gap by emulating the way the human brain processes
natural language, e.g., by leveraging on
semantic features that are not explicitly
expressed in text. Computational models are useful both for scientific purposes (such as exploring the nature of
linguistic communication), as well as for

1556-603X/14/$31.00©2014IEEE

practical purposes (such as enabling
effective human-machine communication). Traditional research disciplines do
not have the tools to completely address
the problem of how language comprehension and production work. Even if
you combine all the approaches, a comprehensive theory would be too complex to be studied using traditional
methods. However, we may be able to
realize such complex theories as computer programs and then test them by
observing how well they perform. By
seeing where they fail, we can incrementally improve them. Computational
models may provide very specific predictions about human behaviors that
can then be explored by the psycholinguist. By continuing this process, we
may eventually acquire a deeper understanding of how human language processing occurs. To realize such a dream
will take the combined efforts of forward-thinking psycholinguists, neuroscientists, anthropologists, philosophers,
and computer scientists.
Unlike previous surveys focusing on
specific aspects or applications of NLP
research (e.g., evaluation criteria (Jones
& Galliers, 1995), knowledge-based systems (Mahesh, Nirenburg, & Tucker,
1997), text retrieval (Jackson & Moulinier, 1997), and connectionist models
(Christiansen & Chater, 1999)), this
review paper focuses on the evolution of
NLP research according to three different paradigms, namely: the bag-ofwords, bag-of-concepts, and bag-of-narratives models. Borrowing the concept
of ‘jumping curves’ from the field of
business management, this survey article
explains how and why NLP research has
been gradually shifting from lexical
semantics to compositional semantics
and offers insights on next-generation
narrative-based NLP technology.
The rest of the paper is organized as
follows: Section 2 presents the historical
background and the different schools of
thought of NLP research; Section 3 discusses past, present, and future evolution
of NLP technolog ies; Section 4
describes traditional syntax-centered
NLP methodologies; Section 5 illustrates emerging semantics-based NLP

approaches; Section 6 introduces pioneering works on narrative understanding; Section 7 proposes further insights
on the evolution of current NLP technologies and suggests near future
research directions; finally, Section 8
concludes the paper and outlines future
areas of NLP research.
2. Background

Since its inception in 1950s, NLP
research has been focusing on tasks such
as machine translation, information
retrieval, text summarization, question
answering, information extraction, topic
modeling, and more recently, opinion
mining. Most NLP research carried out
in the early days focused on syntax,
partly because syntactic processing was
manifestly necessary, and partly through
implicit or explicit endorsement of the
idea of syntax-driven processing.
Although the semantic problems and
needs of NLP were clear from the very
beginning, the strategy adopted by the
research community was to tackle syntax
first, for the more direct applicability of
machine learning techniques. However,
there were some researchers who concentrated on semantics because they saw
it as the really challenging problem or
assumed that semantically-driven processing be a better approach. Thus, Masterman’s and Ceccato’s groups, for example, exploited semantic pattern matching
using semantic categories and semantic
case frames, and in Ceccato’s work (Ceccato, 1967) particularly, world knowledge
was used to extend linguistic semantics,
along with semantic networks as a
device for knowledge representation.
Later works recognized the need for
external knowledge in interpreting and
responding to language input (Minsky,
1968) and explicitly emphasized semantics in the form of general-purpose
semantics with case structures for representation and semantically-driven processing (Schank, 1975).
One of the most popular representation strategies since then has been first
order logic (FOL), a deductive system
that consists of axioms and rules of inferences and can be used to formalize relationally-rich predicates and quantifica-

tion (Barwise, 1977). FOL supports
syntactic, semantic and, to a certain
degree, pragmatic expressions. Syntax
specifies the way groups of symbols are
to be arranged, so that the group of symbols is considered properly formed.
Semantics specifies what well-formed
expressions are supposed to mean. Pragmatics specifies how contextual information can be leveraged to provide better
correlations between different semantics,
which is essential for tasks such as word
sense disambiguation. Logic, however, is
known to have the problem of monotonicity. The set of entailed sentences will
only increase as information is added to
the knowledge base, but this runs the
risk of violating a common property of
human reasoning—the freedom and
flexibility to change one’s mind. Solutions such as default and linear logic
serve to address parts of these issues.
Default logic is proposed by Raymond
Reiter to formalize default assumptions,
e.g., “all birds fly” (Reiter, 1980). However, issues arise when default logic formalizes facts that are true in the majority
of cases but are false with regards to
exceptions to these ‘general rules’, e.g.,
“penguins do not fly”.
Another popular model for the
description of natural language is production rule (Chomsky, 1956). A production rule system keeps a working
memory of on-going memory assertions.
This working memory is volatile and in
turn keeps a set of production rules. A
production rule comprises of an antecedent set of conditions and a consequent set of actions (i.e., IF <conditions> THEN <actions>). The basic
operation for a production rule system
involves a cycle of three steps (‘recognize’, ‘resolve conflict’, and ‘act’) that
repeats until no more rules are applicable
to the working memory. The step ‘recognize’ identifies the rules whose antecedent conditions are satisfied by the current
working memory.The set of rules identified is also called the conflict set. The
step ‘resolve conflict’ looks into the conflict set and selects a set of suitable rules
to execute. The step ‘act’ simply executes
the actions and updates the working
memory. Production rules are modular.

MAY 2014 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE

49

Each rule is independent from the others, allowing rules to be added and
deleted easily. Production rule systems
have a simple control structure and the
rules are easily understood by humans.
This is because rules are usually derived
from the observation of expert behavior
or expert knowledge, thus the terminology used in encoding the rules tends to
resonate with human understanding.
However, there are issues with scalability
when production rule systems become
larger; a significant amount of maintenance is required to maintain a system
with thousands of rules.
Another instance of a prominent
NLP model is the ontology Web language (OWL) (McGuinness & Van
Harmelen, 2004), an XML-based vocabulary that extends the resource description framework (RDF) to provide a
more comprehensive set for ontology
representation, such as the definition of
classes, relationships between classes,
properties of classes, and constraints on
relationships between classes and their
properties. RDF supports the subjectpredicate-object model that makes
assertions about a resource. RDF-based
reasoning engines have been developed
to check for semantic consistency which
then helps to improve ontology classification. In general, OWL requires the
strict definition of static structures, and
therefore is not suitable for representing
knowledge that contains subjective
degrees of confidence. Instead, it is more
suited for representing declarative
knowledge. Furthermore, yet another
problem of OWL is that it does not

allow for an easy representation of temporal-dependent knowledge.
Networks are yet another wellknown way to do NLP. For example,
Bayesian networks (Pearl, 1985) (also
known as belief networks) provide a
means of expressing joint probability
distributions over many interrelated
hypotheses. All variables are represented
using directed acyclic graph (DAG). Arcs
are causal connections between two
variables where the truth of the former
directly affects the truth of the latter. A
Bayesian network is able to represent
subjective degrees of confidence. The
representation explicitly explores the
role of prior knowledge and combines
pieces of evidence of the likelihood of
events. In order to compute the joint
distribution of the belief network, there
is a need to know Pr(P|parents(P)) for
each variable P. It is difficult to determine the probability of each variable P
in the belief network. Hence, it is also
difficult to enhance and maintain the
statistical table for large-scale information processing problems. Bayesian networks also have limited expressiveness,
which is only equivalent to the expressiveness of proposition logic. For this
reason, semantic networks are more
often used in NLP research.
A semantic network (Sowa, 1987) is
a graphical notation for representing
knowledge in patterns of interconnected
nodes and arcs. Definitional networks
focus on IsA relationships between a
concept and a newly defined sub-type.
The result of such a structure is called a
generalization, which in turn supports

TABLE 1 Most popular schools of thought in knowledge representation and NLP research.
APPROACH

CHARACTERISTIC FEATURES

REFERENCE

PRODUCTION RULE

CYCLES OF `RECOGNIZE’, `RESOLVE
CONFLICT’, `ACT’ STEPS

(CHOMSKY, 1956)

SEMANTIC PATTERN
MATCHING

SEMANTIC CATEGORIES AND SEMANTIC
CASE FRAMES

(CECCATO, 1967)

FIRST ORDER LOGIC
(FOL)

AXIOMS AND RULES OF INFERENCES

(BARWISE, 1977)

BAYESIAN NETWORKS

VARIABLES REPRESENTED BY A PROBABILISTIC DIRECTED ACYCLIC GRAPH

(PEARL, 1985)

SEMANTIC NETWORKS

PATTERNS OF INTERCONNECTED NODES
AND ARCS

(SOWA, 1987)

ONTOLOGY WEB
LANGUAGE (OWL)

HIERARCHICAL CLASSES AND RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THEM

(MCGUINNESS & VAN
HARMELEN, 2004)

50

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | MAY 2014

the rule of inheritance for copying
properties defined for a super-type to all
of its sub-types. The information in definitional networks is often assumed to be
true. Yet another kind of semantic networks is the assertional network, which
is meant to assert propositions and the
information it contains is assumed to be
contingently true. Contingent truth is
not reached with the application of
default logic; instead, it is based more on
Man’s application of common-sense.
The proposition also has sufficient reason in which the reason entails the
proposition, e.g., “the stone is warm”
with the sufficient reasons being “the
sun is shining on the stone” and “whatever the sun shines on is warm”.
The idea of semantic networks arose
in the early 1960s from Simmons (Simmons, 1963) and Quillian (Quillian,
1963) and was further developed in the
late 1980s by Marvin Minsky within his
Society of Mind theory (Minsky, 1986),
according to which the magic of
human intelligence stems from our vast
diversity—and not from any single, perfect principle. Minsky theorized that the
mind is made of many little parts that
he termed ‘agents’, each mindless by
itself but able to lead to true intelligence
when working together. These groups
of agents, or ‘agencies’, are responsible
for performing some type of function,
such as remembering, comparing, generalizing, exemplifying, analogizing, simplifying, predicting, etc. Minsky’s theory
of human cognition, in particular, was
welcomed with great enthusiasm by the
artificial intelligence (AI) community
and gave birth to many attempts to
build common-sense knowledge bases
for NLP tasks. The most representative
projects are: (a) Cyc (Lenat & Guha,
1989), Doug Lenat’s logic-based repository of common-sense knowledge; (b)
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), Christiane
Fellbaum’s universal database of word
senses; (c) Thought-Treasure (Mueller,
1998), Erik Mueller’s story understanding system; and (d) the Open Mind
Common Sense project (Singh, 2002), a
second-generation common-sense database. The last project stands out because
knowledge is represented in natural

language (rather than being based upon
a formal logical structure), and information is not hand-crafted by expert engineers but spontaneously inserted by
online volunteers. Today, the commonsense knowledge collected by the Open
Mind Common Sense project is being
exploited for many different NLP tasks
such as textual affect sensing (H. Liu,
Lieberman, & Selker, 2003), casual conversation understanding (Eagle, Singh, &
Pentland, 2003), opinion mining (Cambria & Hussain, 2012), story telling
(Hayden et al., 2013), and more.
3. Overlapping NLP Curves

With the dawn of the Internet Age,
civilization has undergone profound,
rapid-fire changes that we are experiencing more than ever today. Even
technologies that are adapting, growing,
and innovating have the gnawing sense
that obsolescence is right around the
corner. NLP research, in particular, has
not evolved at the same pace as other
technologies in the past 15 years.
While NLP research has made great
strides in producing artificially intelligent behaviors, e.g., Google, IBM’s Watson, and Apple’s Siri, none of such NLP
frameworks actually understand what
they are doing—making them no different from a parrot that learns to repeat
words without any clear understanding
of what it is saying. Today, even the most
popular NLP technologies view text
analysis as a word or pattern matching
task. Trying to ascertain the meaning of
a piece of text by processing it at wordlevel, however, is no different from
attempting to understand a picture by
analyzing it at pixel-level.
In a Web where user-generated content (UGC) is drowning in its own output, NLP researchers are faced with the
same challenge: the need to jump the
curve (Imparato & Harari, 1996) to
make significant, discontinuous leaps in
their thinking, whether it is about
information retrieval, aggregation, or
processing. Relying on arbitrary keywords, punctuation, and word cooccurrence frequencies has worked
fairly well so far, but the explosion of
UGCs and the outbreak of deceptive

phenomena such as web-trolling and
opinion spam, are causing standard NLP
algorithms to be increasing less efficient.
In order to properly extract and manipulate text meanings, a NLP system must
have access to a significant amount of
knowledge about the world and the
domain of discourse.
To this end, NLP systems will
gradually stop relying too much on
word-based techniques while starting
to exploit semantics more consistently
and, hence, make a leap from the
Syntactics Curve to the Semantics
Curve (Figure 1). NLP research has
been interspersed with word-level
approaches because, at first glance, the
most basic unit of linguistic structure
appears to be the word. Single-word
expressions, however, are just a subset
of concepts, multi-word expressions
that carry specific semantics and sentics
(Cambria & Hussain, 2012), that is, the
denotative and connotative information commonly associated with realworld objects, actions, events, and
people. Sentics, in particular, specifies
the affective information associated
with such real-world entities, which is
key for common-sense reasoning and
decision-making.
Semantics and sentics include common-sense knowledge (which humans
normally acquire during the formative
years of their lives) and common knowl-

edge (which people continue to accrue
in their everyday life) in a re-usable
knowledge base for machines. Common
knowledge includes general knowledge
about the world, e.g., a chair is a type of
furniture, while common-sense knowledge comprises obvious or widely
accepted things that people normally
know about the world but which are
usually left unstated in discourse, e.g.,
that things fall downwards (and not
upwards) and people smile when they are
happy. The difference between common
and common-sense knowledge can be
expressed as the difference between
knowing the name of an object and
understanding the same object’s purpose.
For example, you can know the name of
all the different kinds or brands of ‘pipe’,
but not its purpose nor the method of
usage. In other words, a ‘pipe’ is not a
pipe unless it can be used (Magritte,
1929) (Figure 2).
It is through the combined use of
common and common-sense knowledge that we can have a grip on both
high- and low-level concepts as well as
nuances in natural language understanding and therefore effectively communicate with other people without having
to continuously ask for definitions and
explanations. Common-sense, in particular, is key in properly deconstructing
natural language text into sentiments
according to different contexts—for

NLP System Performance

Best Path

Pragmatics Curve
(Bag-of-Narratives)

Semantics Curve
(Bag-of-Concepts)

Syntactics Curve
(Bag-of-Words)

1950

2000

2050

2100

Time

FIGURE 1 Envisioned evolution of NLP research through three different eras or curves.

MAY 2014 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE

51

example, in appraising the concept ‘small
room’ as negative for a hotel review and
‘small queue’ as positive for a post office,
or the concept ‘go read the book’ as
positive for a book review but negative
for a movie review.
Semantics, however, is just one layer
up in the scale that separates NLP from
natural language understanding. In
order to achieve the ability to accurately and sensibly process information,
computational models will also need to
be able to project semantics and sentics
in time, compare them in a parallel and
dynamic way, according to different
contexts and with respect to different
actors and their intentions (Howard &
Cambria, 2013). This will mean jumping from the Semantics Curve to the
Pragmatics Curve, which will enable
NLP to be more adaptive and, hence,
open-domain, context-aware, and
intent-driven. Intent, in particular, will
be key for tasks such as sentiment analysis—a concept that generally has a
negative connotation, e.g., small seat,
might turn out to be positive, e.g., if the
intent is for an infant to be safely seated
in it.
While the paradigm of the Syntactics Curve is the bag-of-words model
(Zellig, 1954) and the Semantics
Curve is characterized by a bag-ofconcepts model (Cambria & Hussain,
2012), the paradigm of the Pragmatics
Curve will be the bag-of-narratives
model. In this last model, each piece
of text will be represented by ministories or interconnected episodes,
leading to a more detailed level of text
comprehension and sensible computation. While the bag-of-concepts model
helps to overcome problems such as
word-sense disambiguation and
semantic role labeling, the bag-of-narratives model will enable tackling
NLP issues such as co-reference resolution and textual entailment.

ing argued the importance and inevitability of a shift away from syntax for
years, the vast major ity of NLP
researchers nowadays are still trying to
keep their balance on the Syntactics
Curve. Syntax-centered NLP can be
broadly grouped into three main categories: keyword spotting, lexical affinity,
and statistical methods.
4.1. Keyword Spotting

Keyword Spotting is the most naïve
approach and probably also the most
popular because of its accessibility and
economy. Text is classified into categories based on the presence of fairly
unambiguous words. Popular projects
include: (a) Ortony’s Affective Lexicon
(Ortony, Clore, & Collins, 1988), which
groups words into affective categories;
(b) Penn Treebank (Marcus, Santorini, &
Marcinkiewicz, 1994), a corpus consisting of over 4.5 million words of American English annotated for part-ofspeech (POS) infor mation; (c)
PageRank (Page, Brin, Motwani, &
Winograd, 1999), the famous ranking
algorithm of Google; (d) LexRank
(GÜnes & Radev, 2004), a stochastic
graph-based method for computing relative importance of textual units for
NLP; finally, (e) TextRank (Mihalcea &
Tarau, 2004), a graph-based ranking
model for text processing, based on two
unsupervised methods for keyword and
sentence extraction. The major weakness
of keyword spotting lies in its reliance
upon the presence of obvious words
which are only surface features of the
prose. A text document about dogs
where the word ‘dog’ is never mentioned, e.g., because dogs are addressed
according to the specific breeds they

4. Poising on the Syntactics Curve

Today, syntax-centered NLP is still the
most popular way to manage tasks such
as information retrieval and extraction,
auto-categorization, topic modeling,
etc. Despite semantics enthusiasts hav-

52

FIGURE 2 A ‘pipe’ is not a pipe, unless
we know how to use it.

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | MAY 2014

belong to, might never be retrieved by a
keyword-based search engine.
4.2. Lexical Affinity

Lexical Affinity is slightly more sophisticated than keyword spotting as, rather
than simply detecting obvious words, it
assigns to arbitrary words a probabilistic
‘affinity’ for a particular category (Bush,
1999; Bybee & Scheibman, 1999; Krug,
1998; Church & Hanks, 1989; Jurafsky
et al., 2000). For example, ‘accident’
might be assigned a 75% probability of
indicating a negative event, as in ‘car
accident’ or ‘hurt in an accident’. These
probabilities are usually gleaned from
linguistic corpora (Kucera & Francis,
1969; Godfrey, Holliman, & McDaniel,
1992; Stevenson, Mikels, & James, 2007).
Although this approach often outperforms pure keyword spotting, there are
two main problems with it. First, lexical
affinity operating solely on the wordlevel can easily be tricked by sentences
such as “I avoided an accident” (negation) and “I met my girlfriend by accident” (connotation of unplanned but
lovely surprise). Second, lexical affinity
probabilities are often biased toward text
of a particular genre, dictated by the
source of the linguistic corpora. This
makes it difficult to develop a re-usable,
domain-independent model.
4.3. Statistical NLP

Statistical NLP has been the mainstream
NLP research direction since late 1990s.
It relies on language models (Manning
& SchÜtze, 1999; Hofmann, 1999;
Nigam, McCallum, Thrun, & Mitchell,
2000) based on popular machine-learning algorithms such as maximum-likelihood (Berger, Della Pietra, & Della
Pietra, 1996), expectation maximization
(Nigam et al., 2000), conditional random fields (Lafferty, McCallum, &
Pereira, 2001), and support vector
machines (Joachims, 2002). By feeding a
large training corpus of annotated texts
to a machine-learning algorithm, it is
possible for the system to not only learn
the valence of keywords (as in the keyword spotting approach), but also to take
into account the valence of other arbitrary keywords (like lexical affinity),

punctuation, and word co-occurrence
frequencies. However, statistical methods
are generally semantically weak, meaning that, with the exception of obvious
keywords, other lexical or co-occurrence elements in a statistical model
have little predictive value individually.
As a result, statistical text classifiers only
work with acceptable accuracy when
given a sufficiently large text input. So,
while these methods may be able to
classify text on the page- or paragraphlevel, they do not work well on smaller
text units such as sentences or clauses.
5. Surfing the Semantics Curve

Semantics-based NLP focuses on the
intrinsic meaning associated with natural language text. Rather than simply
processing documents at syntax-level,
semantics-based approaches rely on
implicit denotative features associated
with natural language text, hence stepping away from the blind usage of keywords and word co-occurrence count.
Unlike purely syntactical techniques,
concept-based approaches are also able
to detect semantics that are expressed
in a subtle manner, e.g., through the
analysis of concepts that do not explicitly convey relevant information, but
which are implicitly linked to other
concepts that do so. Semantics-based
NLP approaches can be broadly
grouped into two main categories:
techniques that leverage on external
knowledge, e.g., ontologies (taxonomic
NLP) or semantic knowledge bases
(noetic NLP), and methods that exploit
only intrinsic semantics of documents
(endogenous NLP).
5.1. Endogenous NLP

Endogenous NLP involves the use of
machine-learning techniques to perform semantic analysis of a corpus by
building structures that approximate
concepts from a large set of documents.
It does not involve prior semantic
understanding of documents; instead, it
relies only on the endogenous knowledge of these (rather than on external
knowledge bases). The advantages of this
approach over the knowledge engineering approach are effectiveness, consider-

able savings in terms of expert manpower, and straightforward portability to
different domains (Sebastiani, 2002).
Endogenous NLP includes methods
based either on lexical semantics, which
focuses on the meanings of individual
words, or compositional semantics,
which looks at the meanings of sentences and longer utterances. The vast
m a j o r i t y o f e n d og e n o u s N L P
approaches is based on lexical semantics
and includes well-known machinelearning techniques. Some examples of
this are: (a) latent semantic analysis
(Hofmann, 2001), where documents are
represented as vectors in a term space;
(b) latent Dirichlet allocation (Porteous
et al., 2008), which involves attributing
document terms to topics; (c) MapReduce (C. Liu, Qi, Wang, & Yu, 2012), a
framework that has proved to be very
efficient for data-intensive tasks, e.g.,
large scale RDFS/OWL reasoning and
(d) genetic algorithms (D. Goldberg,
1989), probabilistic search procedures
designed to work on large spaces
involving states that can be represented
by strings.
Works leveraging on compositional
semantics, instead, mainly include
approaches based on Hidden Markov
Models (Denoyer, Zaragoza, & Gallinari,
2001; Frasconi, Soda, & Vullo, 2001),
association rule learning (Cohen, 1995;
Cohen & Singer, 1999), feature ensembles (Xia, Zong, Hu, & Cambria, 2013;
Poria, Gelbukh, Hussain, Das, & Bandyopadhyay, 2013) and probabilistic generative models (Lau, Xia, & Ye, 2014).
5.2. Taxonomic NLP

Taxonomic NLP includes initiatives
that aim to build universal taxonomies
or Web ontologies for grasping the subsumptive or hierarchical semantics associated with natural language expressions. Such taxonomies usually consist
of concepts (e.g., painter), instances (e.g.,
“Leonardo da Vinci”), attributes and
values (e.g., “Leonardo’s birthday is
April 15, 1452”), and relationships (e.g.,
“Mona Lisa is painted by Leonardo”).
In particular, subsumptive knowledge
representations build upon IsA relationships, which are usually extracted

through syntactic patterns for automatic hypernym discovery (Hearst,
1992) able to infer triples such as
<Pablo Picasso-IsA-ar tist> from
stretches of text like “...artists such as
Pablo Picasso...” or “...Pablo Picasso
and other artists...”.
In general, attempts to build taxonomic resources are countless and
include both resources crafted by
human experts or community efforts,
such as WordNet and Freebase (Bollacker, Evans, Paritosh, Sturge, & Taylor,
2008), and automatically built knowledge bases. Examples of such knowledge bases include: (a) WikiTaxonomy
(Ponzetto & Strube, 2007), a taxonomy
extracted from Wikipedia’s category
links; (b) YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, &
Weikum, 2007), a semantic knowledge
base derived from WordNet, Wikipedia,
and GeoNames; (c) NELL (Carlson et
al., 2010) (Never-Ending Language
Learning), a semantic machine-learning
system that is acquiring knowledge
from the Web every day; finally, (d) Probase (Wu, Li, Wang, & Zhu, 2012), a
research prototype that aims to build a
unified taxonomy of worldly facts from
1.68 billion webpages in Bing repository.
Other popular Semantic Web projects include: (a) SHOE (Heflin & Hendler, 1999) (Simple HTML Ontology
Extensions), a knowledge representation language that allows webpages to
be annotated with semantics; (b)
Annotea (Kahan, 2002), an open RDF
infrastructure for shared Web annotations; (c) SIOC (Breslin, Harth, Bojars,
& Decker, 2005) (Semantically Interlinked Online Communities), an ontology combining terms from vocabularies that already exist with new terms
needed to describe the relationships
between concepts in the realm of
online community sites; (d) SKOS
(Miles & Bechhofer, 2009) (Simple
Knowledge Organization System), an
area of work developing specifications
and standards to support the use of
knowledge organization systems such
as thesauri, classification schemes, subject heading lists and taxonomies; (e)
FOAF (Br ickley & Miller, 2010)
(Friend Of A Friend), a project devoted

MAY 2014 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE

53

to linking people and information
using the Web; (f ) ISOS (Ding, Jin,
Ren, & Hao, 2013) (Intelligent SelfOrganizing Scheme), a scheme for the
Internet of Things inspired by the
endocr ine regulating mechanism;
finally, (g) FRED (Gangemi, Presutti, &
Reforgiato, 2014), a tool that produces
an event-based RDF/OWL representation of natural language text. The main
weakness of taxonomic NLP is in the
typicality of their knowledge bases. The
way knowledge is represented in taxonomies and Web ontologies is usually
strictly defined and does not allow for
the combined handling of differing
nuanced concepts, as the inference of
semantic features associated with concepts is bound by the fixed, flat representation. The concept of ‘book’, for
example, is typically associated to concepts such as ‘newspaper’ or ‘magazine’,
as it contains knowledge, has pages, etc.
In a different context, however, a book
could be used as paperweight, doorstop,
or even as a weapon. Another key
weakness of Semantic Web projects is
that they are not easily scalable and,
hence, not widely adopted (Gueret,
Schlobach, Dentler, Schut, & Eiben,
2012). This increases the amount of
time that has to pass before the initial
customer feedback is even possible, and
also slows down feedback loop iterations, ultimately putting Semantic Web
applications at a user-experience and
agility disadvantage as compared to
their Web 2.0 counterparts, because
their usability inadvertently takes a
back seat to the number of other complex problems that have to be solved
before clients even see the application.
5.3. Noetic NLP

Noetic NLP embraces all the mindinspired approaches to NLP that
attempt to compensate for the lack of
domain adaptivity and implicit semantic feature inference of traditional algorithms, e.g., first principles modeling or
explicit statistical modeling. Noetic
NLP differs from taxonomic NLP in
which it does not focus on encoding
subsumption knowledge, but rather
attempts to collect idiosyncratic knowl-

54

edge about objects, actions, events, and
people. Noetic NLP, moreover, performs reasoning in an adaptive and
dynamic way, e.g., by generating context-dependent results or by discovering new semantic patterns that are not
explicitly encoded in the knowledge
base. Examples of noetic NLP include
paradigms such as connectionist NLP
(Christiansen & Chater, 1999), which
models mental phenomena as emergent
processes of interconnected networks
of simple units, e.g., neural networks
(Collobert et al., 2011); deep learning
(Martinez, Bengio, & Yannakakis, 2013);
sentic computing (Cambria & Hussain,
2012), an approach to concept-level
sentiment analysis based on an ensemble of graph-mining and dimensionality-reduction techniques; and energybased knowledge representation
(Olsher, 2013), a novel framework for
nuanced common-sense reasoning.
Besides knowledge representation
and reasoning, a key aspect of noetic
NLP is also semantic parsing. Most current NLP technologies rely on part-ofspeech (POS) tagging, but that is unlike
the way the human mind extracts
meaning from text. Instead, just as the
human mind does, a construction-based
semantic parser (CBSP) (Cambria, Rajagopal, Olsher, & Das, 2013) quickly
identifies meaningful stretches of text
without requiring time-consuming
phrase structure analysis. The use of constructions, defined as “stored pairings of
form and function” (A. Goldberg, 2003)
makes it possible to link distributed linguistic components to one another, easing extraction of semantics from linguistic structures. Constructions are
composed of fixed lexical items and category-based slots, or ‘spaces’ that are
filled in by lexical items during text processing. An interesting example from the
relevant literature would be the construction [<ACTION> <OBJECT>
<DIRECTION> <OBJECT>].
Instances of this include the phrases
‘sneeze the napkin across the table’ or
‘hit the ball over the fence’. Constructions not only help understand how various lexical items work together to create the whole meaning, but also give the

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | MAY 2014

parser a sense of what categories of
words are used together and thus where
to expect different words.
CBSP uses this knowledge to determine constructions, their matching lexical terms, and how good each match is.
Each of CBSP’s constructions contributes its own unique semantics and carries a unique name. In order to choose
the best possible construction for each
span of text, CBSP uses knowledge
about the lexical items found in text.
This knowledge is obtained from looking individual lexical terms up in the
knowledge bases so as to obtain information about the basic category membership of that word.
It then efficiently compares these
potential memberships with the categories specified for each construction in
the corpus, finding the best matches so
that CBSP can extract a concept from a
sentence. An example would be the
extraction of the concept ‘buy christmas
present’ from the sentence “today I
bought a lot of very nice Christmas
gifts”. Constructions are typically nested
within one another: CBSP is capable of
finding only those construction overlaps
that are semantically sensible, based on
the overall semantics of constructions
and construction slot categories, thus
greatly reducing the time taken to process large numbers of texts. In the big
data environment, a key benefit of construction-based parsing is that only small
sections of text are required in order to
extract meaning; word category information and the generally small size of
constructions mean that the parser can
still make use of error-filled or conventionally unparseable text.
6. Foreseeing the Pragmatics Curve

Narrative understanding and generation
are central for reasoning, decision-making, and ‘sensemaking’. Besides being a
key part of human-to-human communication, narratives are the means by
which reality is constructed and planning is conducted. Decoding how narratives are generated and processed by
the human brain might eventually lead
us to truly understand and explain
human intelligence and consciousness.

Computational modeling is a powerful and effective way to investigate
narrative understanding. A lot of the
cognitive processes that lead humans to
understand or generate narratives have
traditionally been of interest to AI
researchers under the umbrella of
knowledge representation, commonsense reasoning, social cognition, learning, and NLP. Once NLP research can
grasp semantics at a level comparable to
human text processing, the jump to the
Pragmatics Curve will be necessary, in
the same way as semantic machine
learning is now gradually evolving from
lexical to compositional semantics.
There are already a few pioneering
works that attempt to understand narratives by leveraging on discourse structure (Asher & Lascarides, 2003), argument-suppor t hierarchies (Bex,
Prakken, & Verheij, 2007), plan graphs
(Young, 2007), and common-sense reasoning (Mueller, 2007). One of the
most representative initiatives in this
context is Patrick Winston’s work on
computational models of narrative
(Winston, 2011; Richards, Finlayson, &
Winston, 2009), which is based on five
key hypotheses:
❏ The inner language hypothesis: we
have an inner symbolic language that
enables event description.
❏ The strong story hypothesis: we can
assemble event descriptions into stories.
❏ The directed perception hypothesis:
we can direct the resources of our perceptual faculties to answer questions
using real and imagined situations.
❏ The social animal hypothesis: we
have a powerful reason to express the
thought in our inner language in an
external communication language.
❏ The exotic engineering hypothesis:
our brains are unlike standard left-toright engineered systems.
Essentially, Patrick Winston believes
that human intelligence stems from our
unique abilities for storytelling and
understanding (Finlayson & Winston,
2011). Accordingly, his recent work has
focused on developing a computational
system that is able to analyze narrative
texts to infer non-obvious answers to
questions about these texts. This has

resulted in the Genesis System. Working with short story summaries provided in English, together with lowl eve l c o m m o n - s e n s e r u l e s a n d
higher-level reflection patterns that are
also expressed in English, Genesis has
been successful in demonstrating several story understanding capabilities.
One instance of this is its ability to
determine that both Macbeth and the
2007 Russia-Estonia Cyberwar involve
revenge, even though neither the word
‘revenge’ nor any of its synonyms are
mentioned in accounts descr ibing
those texts.
7. Discussion

Word- and concept-level approaches to
NLP are just a first step towards natural
language understanding. The future of
NLP lies in biologically and linguistically motivated computational paradigms
that enable narrative understanding and,
hence, ‘sensemaking’. Computational intelligence potentially has a large future
possibility to play an important role in
NLP research. Fuzzy logic, for example,
has a direct relation to NLP (Carvalho,
Batista, & Coheur, 2012) for tasks such
as sentiment analysis (Subasic &
Huettner, 2001), linguistic summarization (Kacprzyk & Zadrozny, 2010),
knowledge representation (Lai, Wu, Lin,
& Huang, 2011), and word meaning inference (Kazemzadeh, Lee, & Narayanan,
2013). Artificial neural networks can aid
the completion of NLP tasks such as
ambiguity resolution (Chan & Franklin,
1998; Costa, Frasconi, Lombardo, &
Soda, 2005), grammatical inference
(Lawrence, Giles, & Fong, 2000), word
representation (Luong, Socher, & Manning, 2013), and emotion recognition
(Cambria, Gastaldo, Bisio, & Zunino,
2014). Evolutionary computation can be
exploited for tasks such as grammatical
evolution (O’Neill & Ryan, 2001),
knowledge discover y (AtkinsonAbutridy, Mellish, & Aitken, 2003), text
categorization (Araujo, 2004), and rule
lear ning (Ghandar, Michalewicz,
Schmidt, To, & Zurbruegg, 2009).
Despite its potential, however, the
use of computational intelligence techniques till date has not been so active

in the field of NLP. The first reason is
that NLP is a huge field currently tackling dozens of different problems for
which specific evaluation metrics exist,
and it is not possible to reduce the
whole field into a specific problem, as it
was done in early works (Novak, 1992).
The second reason may be that powerful techniques such as support vector
machines (Drucker, Wu, & Vapnik,
1999), kernel principal component
analysis (Schölkopf et al., 1999), and latent Dirichlet allocation (Mukherjee &
Blei, 2009) have achieved remarkable
results on widely used NLP datasets,
which are not yet met by computational intelligence techniques. All such
word-based algorithms, however, are
limited by the fact that they can process
only the information that they can ‘see’
and, hence, will sooner or later reach
saturation. Computational intelligence
techniques, instead, can go beyond the
syntactic representation of documents
by emulating the way the human brain
processes natural language (e.g., by leveraging on semantic features that are
not explicitly expressed in text) and,
hence, have higher potential to tackle
complementary NLP tasks. An ensemble of computational intelligence techniques, for example, could be exploited
within the same NLP model for online learning of natural language concepts (through neural networks),
concept classification and semantic feature generalization (through fuzzy sets),
and concept meaning evolution and
continuous system optimization
(through evolutionary computation).
8. Conclusion

In a Web where user-generated content
has already hit critical mass, the need for
sensible computation and information
aggregation is increasing exponentially,
as demonstrated by the ‘mad rush’ in the
industry for ‘big data experts’ and the
growth of a new ‘Data Science’ discipline. The democratization of online
content creation has led to the increase
of Web debris, which is inevitably and
negatively affecting information retrieval
and extraction. To analyze this negative
trend and propose possible solutions, this

MAY 2014 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE

55

review paper focused on the evolution
of NLP research according to three different paradigms, namely: the bag-ofwords, bag-of-concepts, and bag-of-narratives models. Borrowing the concept
of ‘jumping curves’ from the field of
business management, this survey article
explained how and why NLP research is
gradually shifting from lexical semantics
to compositional semantics and offered
insights on next-generation narrativebased NLP technology.
Jumping the curve, however, is not
an easy task: the origins of human language has sometimes been called the
hardest problem of science (Christiansen
& Kirby, 2003). NLP technologies
evolved from the era of punch cards and
batch processing (in which the analysis
of a natural language sentence could
take up to 7 minutes (Plath, 1967)) to
the era of Google and the likes of it (in
which millions of webpages can be processed in less than a second). Even the
most efficient word-based algorithms,
however, perform very poorly, if not
properly trained or when contexts and
domains change. Such algorithms are
limited by the fact that they can process
only information that they can ‘see’.
Language, however, is a system where all
terms are interdependent and where the
value of one is the result of the simultaneous presence of the others (De Saussure, 1916). As human text processors,
we ‘see more than what we see’ (Davidson, 1997) in which every word activates a cascade of semantically-related
concepts that enable the completion of
complex NLP tasks, such as word-sense
disambiguation, textual entailment, and
semantic role labeling, in a quick and
effortless way.
Concepts are the glue that holds our
mental world together (Murphy, 2004).
Without concepts, there would be no
mental world in the first place (Bloom,
2003). Needless to say, the ability to
organize knowledge into concepts is
one of the defining characteristics of the
human mind. A truly intelligent system
needs physical knowledge of how
objects behave, social knowledge of how
people interact, sensory knowledge of
how things look and taste, psychological

56

knowledge about the way people think,
and so on. Having a database of millions
of common-sense facts, however, is not
enough for computational natural language understanding: we will need to
teach NLP systems how to handle this
knowledge (IQ), but also interpret emotions (EQ) and cultural nuances (CQ).
References
[1] J. Allen, Natural Language Understanding. Redwood City,
CA: Benjamin/Cummings, 1987.
[2] L. Araujo, “Symbiosis of evolutionary techniques and
statistical natural language processing,” IEEE Trans. Evol.
Comput., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 14–27, 2004.
[3] N. Asher and A. Lascarides, Logics of Conversation.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[4] J. Atkinson-Abutridy, C. Mellish, and S. Aitken, “A
semantically guided and domain independent evolutionary model for knowledge discovery from texts,” IEEE
Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 546–560, 2003.
[5] J. Barwise, “An introduction to first-order logic,” in
Handbook of Mathematical Logic. (Studies in Logic and the
Foundations of Mathematics). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
[6] A. Berger, V. D. Pietra, and S. D. Pietra, “A maximum
entropy approach to natural language processing,” Comput. Linguistics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 39–71, 1996.
[7] F. Bex, H. Prakken, and B. Verheij, “Formalizing
argumentative story-based analysis of evidence,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence Law, 2007, pp. 1-10.
[8] P. Bloom, “Glue for the mental world,” Nature, vol.
421, pp. 212–213, Jan. 2003.
[9] K. Bollacker, C. Evans, P. Paritosh, T. Sturge, and J.
Taylor, “Freebase: A collaboratively created graph database
for structuring human knowledge,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Management Data, 2008, pp. 1247–1250.
[10] J. Breslin, A. Harth, U. Bojars, and S. Decker, “Towards semantically-interlinked online communities,” in
The Semantic Web: Research and Applications. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2005, pp. 500–514.
[11] D. Brickley and L. Miller. (2010). FOAF vocabulary specification 0.98. Namespace Document [Online].
Available: http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/
[12] N. Bush, “The predictive value of transitional probability for word-boundary palatalization in English,”
Unpublished M.S .thesis, Univ. New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, 1999.
[13] J. Bybee and J. Scheibman, “The effect of usage on
degrees of constituency: The reduction of don’t in English,” Linguistics, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 575–596, 1999.
[14] E. Cambria, P. Gastaldo, F. Bisio, and R. Zunino,
“An ELM-based model for affective analogical reasoning,” Neurocomputing, Special Issue on Extreme Learning
Machines, 2014.
[15] E. Cambria and A. Hussain, Sentic Computing: Techniques, Tools, and Applications. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer-Verlag, 2012.
[16] E. Cambria, D. Rajagopal, D. Olsher, and D. Das, “Big
social data analysis,” in Big Data Computing, R. Akerkar,
Ed. London: Chapman and Hall, 2013, pp. 401–414.
[17] A. Carlson, J. Betteridge, B. Kisiel, B. Settles, E.
Hruschka, and T. Mitchell, “Toward an architecture for
never-ending language learning,” in Proc. Conf. Artificial
Intelligence AAAI, Atlanta, GA, 2010, pp. 1306–1313.
[18] J. Carvalho, F. Batista, and L. Coheur, “A critical
survey on the use of fuzzy sets in speech and natural language processing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy Systems,
2012, pp. 270–277.
[19] S. Ceccato, “Correlational analysis and mechanical translation,” in Machine Translation, A. D. Booth,
Ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland,
1967, pp. 77–135.

IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | MAY 2014

[20] S. Chan and J. Franklin, “Symbolic connectionism
in natural language disambiguation,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 739–755, 1998.
[21] N. Chomsky, “Three models for the description of
language,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 2, no. 3, pp.
113–124, 1956.
[22] M. Christiansen and N. Chater, “Connectionist
natural language processing: The state of the art,” Cogn.
Sci., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 417–437, 1999.
[23] M. Christiansen and S. Kirby, “Language evolution:
The hardest problem in science?” in Language Evolution,
M. Christiansen and S. Kirby, Eds. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford
Univ. Press, 2003. pp. 1–15.
[24] K. Church and P. Hanks, “Word association norms,
mutual information, and lexicography,” in Proc. 27th Annu.
Meeting Association Computational Linguistics, 1989, pp. 76–83.
[25] W. Cohen, “Learning to classify English text with
ILP methods,” in Advances in Inductive Logic Programming,
L. De Raedt, Ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS
Press, 1995, pp. 124–143.
[26] W. Cohen and Y. Singer, “Context-sensitive learning methods for text categorization,” ACM Trans. Inform.
Syst., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 141–173, 1999.
[27] R. Collobert, J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen, K.
Kavukcuoglu, and P. Kuksa, “Natural language processing (almost) from scratch,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 12,
pp. 2493–2537, 2011.
[28] F. Costa, P. Frasconi, V. Lombardo, P. Sturt, and G.
Soda, “Ambiguity resolution analysis in incremental parsing of natural language,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol.
16, no. 4, pp. 959–971, 2005.
[29] D. Davidson, “Seeing through language,” in Royal
Institute of Philosophy, Supplement. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997, vol. 42 , pp. 15–28.
[30] L. Denoyer, H. Zaragoza, and P. Gallinari, “HMMbased passage models for document classification and
ranking,” in Proc. 23rd European Colloq. Information Retrieval Research, Darmstadt, Germany, 2001.
[31] F. de Saussure, Cours de Linguistique Générale. Paris:
Payot, 1916.
[32] Y. Ding, Y. Jin, L. Ren, and K. Hao, “An intelligent self-organization scheme for the Internet of things,”
IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 41–53, 2013.
[33] H. Drucker, D. Wu, and V. Vapnik, “Support vector
machines for spam categorization,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1048–1054, 1999.
[34] M. Dyer, “Connectionist natural language processing: A status report,” in Computational Architectures
Integrating Neural and Symbolic Processes, R. Sun and L.
Bookman, Eds. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic, 1995, vol. 292, pp. 389–429.
[35] N. Eagle, P. Singh, and A. Pentland, “Common sense
conversations: Understanding casual conversation using a
common sense database,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artificial
Intelligence, 2003.
[36] C. Fellbaum, WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database
(language, speech, and communication). Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press, 1998.
[37] M. Finlayson and P. Winston, “Narrative is a key
cognitive competency,” in Proc. 2nd Annu. Meeting Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, 2011, p. 110.
[38] P. Frasconi, G. Soda, and A. Vullo, “Text categorization for multi-page documents: A hybrid naive Bayes
HMM approach,” J. Intell. Inform. Syst., vol. 18, nos. 2–3,
pp. 195–217, 2001.
[39] A. Gangemi, V. Presutti, D. Reforgiato, “Framebased detection of opinion holders and topics: A model
and a tool,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 9, no. 1, pp.
20–30, 2014.
[40] A. Ghandar, Z. Michalewicz, M. Schmidt, T. To,
and R. Zurbruegg, “Computational intelligence for
evolving trading rules,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol.
13, no. 1, pp. 71–86, 2009.
[41] J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel, “Switchboard: Telephone speech corpus for research and development,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, Signal
Processing, 1992, pp. 517–520.

[42] A. Goldberg, “Constructions: A new theoretical approach to language,” Trends Cogn. Sci., vol. 7, no. 5, pp.
219–224, 2003.
[43] D. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization,
and Machine Learning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[44] C. Gueret, S. Schlobach, K. Dentler, M. Schut, and
G. Eiben, “Evolutionary and swarm computing for the
semantic Web,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 16–31, 2012.
[45] E. Günes and D. Radev, “LexRank: Graph-based
lexical centrality as salience in text summarization,” J.
Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 457–479, 2004.
[46] K. Hayden, D. Novy, C. Havasi, M. Bove, S. Alfaro,
and R. Speer, “Narratarium: An immersive storytelling
environment,” in Proc. Human-Computer Interaction, 2013,
vol. 374, pp. 536–540.
[47] M. Hearst, “Automatic acquisition of hyponyms
from large text corpora,” in Proc. 14th Conf. Computational
Linguistics, 1992, pp. 539–545.
[48] J. Hef lin and J. Hendler, “Shoe: A knowledge representation language for internet applications,” Univ.
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, Tech. Rep., 1999.
[49] T. Hofmann, “Probabilistic latent semantic indexing,” in Proc. 22nd Annu. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Research
Development Information Retrieval, 1999, p. 50–57.
[50] T. Hofmann, “Unsupervised learning by probabilistic latent semantic analysis,” Machine Learn., vol. 42, nos.
1–2, pp. 177–196, 2001.
[51] N. Howard and E. Cambria, “Intention awareness:
Improving upon situation awareness in human-centric environments,” Human-Centric Computing Information Sciences.
vol. 3, Cambridge, MA: Springer-Verlag, 2013. no. 9.
[52] N. Imparato and O. Harari, Jumping the Curve: Innovation and Strategic Choice in An Age of Transition. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 1996.
[53] P. Jackson and I. Moulinier, Natural Language Processing for Online Applications: Text Retrieval, Extraction and
Categorization. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 1997.
[54] T. Joachims, Learning To Classify Text Using Support
Vector Machines: Methods, Theory and Algorithms. Norwell,
MA: Kluwer Academic, 2002.
[55] K. Jones and J. Galliers, “Evaluating natural language
processing systems: An analysis and review,” Comput. Linguistics, vol. 24, no. 2, 1995.
[56] D. Jurafsky, A. Bell, M. Gregory, W. Raymond,
J. Bybee, and P. Hopper, Probabilistic Relations Between
Words: Evidence From Reduction In Lexical Production. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins, 2000.
[57] J. Kacprzyk and S. Zadrozny, “Computing with
words is an implementable paradigm: Fuzzy queries,
linguistic data summaries, and natural-language generation,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 18, no. 3, pp.
461–472. 2010.
[58] J. Kahan, “Annotea: An open RDF infrastructure
for shared web annotations,” Comput. Netw., vol. 39, no.
5, pp. 589–608, 2002.
[59] A. Kazemzadeh, S. Lee, and S. Narayanan, “Fuzzy
logic models for the meaning of emotion words,” IEEE
Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 34–49, 2013.
[60] M. Krug, “String frequency: A cognitive motivating
factor in coalescence, language processing, and linguistic
change,” J. Eng. Linguistics, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 286–320,
1998.
[61] H. Kucera and N. Francis, “Computational analysis
of present-day American English,” Int. J. Amer. Linguistics, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 71–75, 1969.
[62] J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira, “Conditional random fields: Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
Machine Learning, 2001, pp. 282–289.
[63] L. Lai, C. Wu, P. Lin, and L. Huang, “Developing a
fuzzy search engine based on fuzzy ontology and semantic search,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Fuzzy Systems, Taipei,
Taiwan, 2011, pp. 2684–2689.
[64] R. Lau, Y. Xia, and Y. Ye, “A probabilistic generative
model for mining cybercriminal networks from online

social media,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 31–43, 2014.
[65] S. Lawrence, C. Giles, and S. Fong, “Natural language grammatical inference with recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowledge. Data Eng., vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 126–140, 2000.
[66] D. Lenat and R. Guha, Building Large KnowledgeBased Systems: Representation and Inference in the Cyc Project.
Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[67] C. Liu, G. Qi, H. Wang, and Y. Yu, “Reasoning with
large scale ontologies in fuzzy pD* using mapreduce,”
IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 7, no. 27, pp. 54–66, 2012.
[68] H. Liu, H. Lieberman, and T. Selker, “A model of
textual affect sensing using real-world knowledge,” in
Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Intelligent User Interfaces, 2003, pp.
125–132.
[69] M. Luong, R. Socher, and C. Manning, “Better word
representations with recursive neural networks for morphology,” in Proc. Conf. Natural Language Learning, 2013.
[70] R. Magritte, “Les mots et les images,” La Révolution
surréaliste, no. 12, 1929.
[71] K. Mahesh, S. Nirenburg, and A. Tucker, KnowledgeBased Systems for Natural Language Processing. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1997.
[72] C. Manning, and H. Schütze, Foundations of Statistical
Natural Language Processing. Cambridge, MA: MIT press,
1999.
[73] M. Marcus, B. Santorini, and M. Marcinkiewicz,
“Building a large annotated corpus of english: The penn
treebank,” Comput. Linguistics, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 313–
330, 1994.
[74] H. Martinez, Y. Bengio, and G. Yannakakis, “Learning deep physiological models of affect,” IEEE Comput.
Intell. Mag., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 20–33, 2013.
[75] D. McGuinness and F. Van Harmelen, OWL web
ontology language overview, W3C recommendation, 2004.
[76] R. Mihalcea and P. Tarau, “TextRank: Bringing order into texts,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural
Language Processing, Barcelona, 2004.
[77] A. Miles and S. Bechhofer, “SKOS simple knowledge organization system reference,” W3C Recommendation, Tech. Rep. 2009.
[78] M. Minsky, Semantic Information Processing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1968.
[79] M. Minsky, The Society of Mind. New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1986.
[80] E. Mueller, Natural Language Processing with ThoughtTreasure. New York: Signifonn, 1998.
[81] E. Mueller, “Modeling space and time in narratives
about restaurants,” Literary Linguistic Comput., vol. 22, no.
1, pp. 67–84, 2007.
[82] I. Mukherjee, and D. Blei, “Relative performance
guarantees for approximate inference in latent dirichlet
allocation,” in Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems,
Vancouver, BC, 2009, pp. 1129–1136.
[83] G. Murphy, The Big Book of Concepts. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2004.
[84] K. Nigam, A. McCallum, S. Thrun, and T. Mitchell,
“Text classification from labeled and unlabeled documents using EM,” Machine Learn., vol. 39, nos. 2–3, pp.
103–134, 2000.
[85] V. Novak, “Fuzzy sets in natural language processing,” in An Introduction to Fuzzy Logic Applications in Intelligent Systems, Yager Ed. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic,
1992, pp. 185–200.
[86] D. Olsher, “COGVIEW & INTELNET: Nuanced
energy-based knowledge representation and integrated
cognitive-conceptual framework for realistic culture,
values, and concept-affected systems simulation,” in Proc.
2013 IEEE Symp. Computational Intelligence Human-Like
Intelligence, Singapore, 2013, pp. 82–91.
[87] M. O’Neill and C. Ryan, “Grammatical evolution,”
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 349–358, 2001.
[88] A. Ortony, G. Clore, and A. Collins, “The cognitive
structure of emotions,” Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
Univ. Press, 1988.

[89] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd,
“The pagerank citation ranking: bringing order to the
web,” Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, Tech. Rep., 1999.
[90] J. Pearl, “Bayesian networks: A model of self-activated memory for evidential reasoning,” UCLA comput.
Sci., Irvine, CA: Tech. Rep. CSD-850017, 1985.
[91] W. Plath, “Multiple path analysis and automatic
translation,” in Machine Translation, A. D. Booth, Ed.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1967, pp.
267–315.
[92] S. Ponzetto and M. Strube, “Deriving a large-scale
taxonomy from Wikipedia,” in Proc. AAAI’07 22nd Nat.
Conf. Artificial Intelligence, Vancouver, BC, 2007, pp.
1440–1445.
[93] S. Poria, A. Gelbukh, A. Hussain, D. Das, and S.
Bandyopadhyay, “Enhanced SenticNet with affective
labels for concept-based opinion mining,” IEEE Intell.
Syst., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 31–38, 2013.
[94] I. Porteous, I. Newman, A. Ihler, A. Asuncion, P.
Smyth, and M. Welling, “Fast collapsed Gibbs sampling
for latent dirichlet allocation,” in Proc. 14th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowledge Discovery Data Mining, 2008,
pp. 569–577.
[95] R. Quillian, “A notation for representing conceptual
information: An application to semantics and mechanical
english paraphrasing,” System Development Corp., Santa
Monica, California, Tech. Rep. SP-1395, 1963.
[96] R. Reiter, “A logic for default reasoning,” Artificial
Intell., vol. 13, pp. 81–132, 1980.
[97] W. Richards, M. Finlayson, and P. Winston, “Advancing computational models of narrative,” MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
Cambridge, MA, Tech. Rep. 2009-063, 2009.
[98] R. Schank, Conceptual Information Processing. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Science Inc., 1975.
[99] B. Schölkopf, S. Mika, C. Burges, P. Knirsch, K.-R.
Müller, G. Rätsch, and A. Smola, “Input space versus feature space in kernel-based methods,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1000–1017, 1999.
[100] F. Sebastiani, “Machine learning in automated text
categorization,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 34, no. 1, pp.
1–47, 2002.
[101] R. Simmons, “Synthetic language behavior,” Data
Processing Manage., vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 11–18, 1963.
[102] P. Singh. (2002). The open mind common sense
project. [Online]. Available: http://www.kurzweilai.net/
[103] J. Sowa, “Semantic networks,” in Encyclopedia of Artificial Intelligence, S. Shapiro, Ed. New York: Wiley, 1987.
[104] R. Stevenson, J. Mikels, and T. James, “Characterization of the affective norms for english words by discrete emotional categories,” Behav. Res. Methods, vol. 39,
no. 4, pp. 1020–1024, 2007.
[105] P. Subasic and A. Huettner, “Affect analysis of text
using fuzzy semantic typing,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst.,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 483–496, 2001.
[106] F. Suchanek, G. Kasneci, and G. Weikum, “Yago:
A core of semantic knowledge,” in Proc. 16th Int. World
Wide Web Conf., 2007. pp. 697–706.
[107] P. Winston, “The strong story hypothesis and
the directed perception hypothesis,” in Proc. AAAi Fall
Symp.: Advances Cognitive Systems, 2011.
[108] W. Wu, H. Li, H. Wang, and K. Zhu, “Probase: A
probabilistic taxonomy for text understanding,” in Proc.
ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Management Data, Scottsdale,
AZ, 2012, pp. 481–492.
[109] R. Xia, C. Zong, X. Hu, and E. Cambria, “Feature ensemble plus sample selection: A comprehensive
approach to domain adaptation for sentiment classification,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 10–18, 2013.
[110] R. Young, “Story and discourse: A bipartite model
of narrative generation in virtual worlds,” Interaction Studies, vol. 8, pp. 177–208, 2007.
[111] H. Zellig, “Distributional structure,” Word, vol. 10,
pp. 146–162, 1954.

MAY 2014 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE

57

